# Pathfinder Fate Accelerated

## Introduction

Hey there! This document and the linked content provides a complete
conversion (aka, a \"hack\") translating concepts from the Pathfinder
RPG by paizo games into the terms of Fate Accelerated Edition (FAE) by
EvilHat games to allow Pathfinder material to be leveraged in a Fate
Accelerated pick up game or campaign.

The main advantage to \"borrowing\" Pathfinder material for use in a
Fate Accelerated game is that it allows a GM to easily take advantage of
the many high quality professional resources published by Paizo such as
maps, pawns, and artwork, but using a much lighter weight story based
game engine with dynamic resolutions. Additionally, players that like
Pathfinder that might not otherwise be interested in trying Fate
Accelerated can be enticed to give Pathfinder FAE a shot and thus become
introduced to the game.

We\'ve had a lot of fun running a variety of games in this way, both
using published adventures as well as homebrewed scenarios based in
Golarion. We hope that others might find similar fun for themselves
reusing the material. 

-- Ed "Killer Shrike" Hastings

:::tip
Though nominally rooted on Pathfinder, this material works for D&D
flavored Fate Accelerated in general.
:::

:::sidebar
#### Two-column Fate Accelerated

This system expands Standard Fate Accelerated, using [Approaches] plus a
separate set of six [Archetypes](#archetypes) which help justify skilled actions
and also add their bonus to 4dF rolls when relevant.

###### Fate Accelerated Links

-   [Fate Accelerated by Evil Hat
    Productions](http://www.evilhat.com/home/fae/)
-   [Fate Accelerated PDF
    (zip)](http://www.evilhat.com/home/wp-content/uploads/FAE.zip)
-   [Online System Reference
    Document](http://fate-srd.com/fate-accelerated-fae-menu)

###### Pathfinder Links

-   [Pathfinder by Paizo Games](http://paizo.com/pathfinder)
-   [Online System Reference
    Document](http://paizo.com/pathfinderRPG/prd/)
-   [A Comprehensive Third Party SRD](http://www.d20pfsrd.com/)
:::

## Character Creation

:::tip
You can just pick or modify a premade
[Iconic](http://www.killershrike.com/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics.aspx)
character if you prefer to skip character creation.
:::

This section will guide you through the process of creating a Pathfinder
Fate Accelerated character.

If you are already familiar with Fate Accelerated, you should find this
to be a straightforward process as Pathfinder Fate Accelerated
characters are basically the same as normal Fate Accelerated characters,
with the added idea of \"Archetypes\" which are explained in detail, and
a Race Aspect. Also, a magic system and guidance on gear and magic items
are provided.

If you are not already familiar with Fate Accelerated, don\'t worry.
You\'ll be walked through the process step by step; just grab a sheet of
paper and a pencil and follow along.

## Character Concept

You should start off with some idea of what kind of character you want
to make, in broad strokes. Often this comes down to an broad
archetypical statement such as \"I want to play some kind of wizard\",
or perhaps a reaction against a stereotype such as \"I want to play a
warrior\...but a clever tricksy one\".

The big idea, so to speak. This will likely get refined down and
polished into your High Concept or Aspects later, but for now it is
enough just to have a sense of what you are aiming for.

## Name

You need a name, and though obviously you can fill this in when it comes
to you, it\'s handy to have a handle for the character as you go thru
the creation process. You can always choose a different name later if
you change your mind.

## Starting Refresh

By default, characters are assumed to start with **3 Refresh**. However,
the GM may alter this up or down if they want to start play with more or
less experienced characters.

Refresh determines your character\'s default Fate point threshold; the
number of Fate points you are guaranteed to start every session with.
However, it also serves as the primary \"currency\" or resource that you
use to gain other abilities for your character, primarily Stunts.

If you want to be flexible and interact with Aspects and thus the
narrative more, you want to keep your Refresh high. If you prefer a less
reactive style of play and prefer reliability and predictability you can
trade Refresh for extra Stunts.

Having a high Refresh affords you a comfortable amount of Fate points to
lean on each session, which gives you a measure of plot protection and
lowers the impact of bad dice rolls. But even with a low Refresh you can
accrue Fate points during play by accepting compels on your Trouble or
Aspects.

## High Concept and Trouble

You need to define a High Concept, which is intended to convey the
essence of your character. High Concepts are usually pithy, and ideally
an interesting attention getter\...the equivalent of an elevator pitch
or a newspaper headline.

You also need a Trouble, which is the counterpoint to your High Concept.
While the High Concept describes your character\'s essence, your Trouble
describes the main source of dramatic tension in your character\'s
ongoing story, the thing that holds them back, or causes them to get
involved in circumstances that they\'d rather avoid but which provide
interesting interludes to their existence.

A good Trouble will not only make your character more \"real\", it also
will provide your most reliable means of regaining Fate points during
play. Though it seems counterintuitive, a Trouble that doesn\'t really
complicate your character\'s existence will make your character weaker,
not stronger. You want to be compelled and involved in the narrative,
and your character\'s Trouble is a primary enabler of that goal.

### Not Yet Sure

Sometimes you may not have a fully crystallized concept when you start
the character creation process, and thus balk at this step. Don\'t
worry, you can change your selections later if your concept gets refined
as you go through the process. However, if you are drawing a blank, just
skip this and come back to it later when you are more confident that you
understand what the character is going to be about.

### The Power Of A Good Image

It can be helpful to have a good mental or visual image of how a
character looks; you may be able to draw inspiration for the
character\'s concept from their appearance. You may want to take a few
minutes to sketch your character, or find something usable that is in
the public domain online.

## Race

:::tip
Race is an extra Aspect; it does not take up one of a character\'s
standard three Aspects.
:::

Pathfinder characters must also choose a Race Aspect, which acts as a
sort of supplementary High Concept. However unlike a High Concept, Race
usually cannot be changed (without some serious magic, at any rate). All
the standard Pathfinder Races (Elf, Dwarf, Gnome, various halfsies,
different Human cultures, etc) are available.

A character\'s Race is a fact about the character that is always true,
and can be interacted with by other abilities that reference the Race.

Like all Aspects, Race has no direct mechanical effect unless invoked;
it primarily provides a justification for a character to do something
that a member of that Race is supposed to be able to do, per the source
material. Actions are resolved using Approaches and Archetypes, and
characters have the option to pay a Fate point to invoke their Race
Aspect in the same way as they use any other Aspect.

::: {.Example}
For instance the player of an Elf could justify spending a Fate point to
invoke their Elf Aspect to get a +2 bonus or a reroll on a notice check
due to the stereotypically keen senses of elvenkind, while a Dwarf could
justify spending a Fate point to invoke their Dwarf Aspect to get a +2
bonus or a reroll when defending against a magical attack due to the
legendary spell resistence of dwarvenkind.
:::

If there is some special ability that a character wants that pertains to
their Race, at their perogative the GM might hand wave it away and allow
the character to use their Race Aspect to justify actions and rely on
**Create Advantage** in particular to handle this sort of thing, or they
might allow an occasional use of a special ability with the expenditure
of a Fate point, or they may require a character to take a Stunt
defining the ability. This is left to GM preference, but by default
Pathfinder Fate assumes that the more permissive method is generally
preferred.

::: {.Example}
For instance many Races have the ability to see in the dark, but it may
not always be relevant to the larger story, and making all members of
such Races take a Darkvision Stunt can be unnecessarily taxing. Thus a
GM might allow a character of such a Race to simply see in the dark due
to their Race Aspect, or similarly may just require them to use the
Create Advantage action to put a situational Aspect on themselves.
Alternately the GM might require the expenditure of a Fate point to
\"turn on\" Darkvision for a scene.
:::

But if they are a stickler, a GM might require characters of a Race that
can see in the dark to take a Darkvision Stunt (and so on for other such
abilities). However, such GM\'s may want to consider bumping up the
number of \"free\" Stunts or base Refresh to compensate for this sort of
Stunt \"tax\", otherwise members of Races that have a lot of common
abilities expressed as Stunts will be very similar to each other and
will have a lessened ability to define other abilities unrelated to
Race.

## Aspects

Aspects are at the heart of Fate, and play an important role in helping
you to define your character.

In Pathfinder Fate Accelerated it is assumed that characters start with
**3 Aspects**.

Your Aspects can be whatever makes sense for your character, but it can
be particularly useful if they help to fill in the character\'s
background and provide a foundation for how they came to have their
abilities and how they became adventurers.

If you are at a loss for coming up with Aspects, try the following. Have
your first Aspect hinge on your character\'s formative years, or their
Race. Then, focus the second Aspect on the character\'s early adulthood
and early successes or perhaps failures and perhaps how they picked up
their Archetypes. Finally have the third Aspect ground what the
character has been doing most recently prior to play starting, and
perhaps anchor their career as an adventurer.

## Approaches and Archetypes

Pathfinder Fate Accelerated uses the standard Approaches defined by Fate
Accelerated; they represent how a character goes about doing something.
Pushing the idea that how characters do things is often as interesting
(or more so) than what they are actually doing is at the heart of what
makes Fate Accelerated such a fun and rewarding game to play.

::: {.Example}
For instance, two different adventurers with similar ability sets
attempt to do the same basic thing. The two characters are basically
interchangeable in this context, and the outcome of the resolution is
relatively uninteresting based upon simple skill resolution semantics.
But using Approaches, one of the characters might prefer to approach the
problem Forcefully while the other does so Carefully, allowing very
different narratives to emerge.
:::

Pathfinder Fate Accelerated extends Fate Accelerated with the concept of
Archetypes intended to capture a character\'s competencies in broad
areas of capabilities modeled on various tropes of fantasy roleplaying
in general and the D&D or Pathfinder gaming experience specifically. The
separation between divine, arcane, and nature-oriented magics, the
unlikely stealth con artistry and burgling ability of various rogues,
the feats of combative arms displayed by warriors of different stripes,
adeptness at more esoteric abilities such as displayed by monks and
psions and similar fringe concepts.

### Approaches

#### Careful

You act with caution, paying attention to the details. When you are
holding back, taking your time, making extra special sure you get it
right, leaving no opening for counterattack, maintaining situational
awareness, buying time, or being guarded in your responses\...you are
being careful .

#### Clever

You think quickly, and act with great finesse. When you do \'the smart
thing\', make intuitive leaps, exploit a nuance or a weakness, outwit or
trick, execute choreographed or complex maneuvers, use an opponent\'s
strengths against them, or otherwise rely on your smarts to solve
something\...you are being clever.

#### Flashy

You act in big showy ways, giving the appearance of sparkling brilliance
and ostentatiously draw attention to yourself. Being larger than life is
a speciality. When you go big, brazenly proclaim, entertain, seek to
impress, bluster your way out of something, show off, or just do things
while piling on with extra awesome style\...you are being flashy.

#### Forceful

You act boldly with no hesitation and without holding back. Both
physically and mentally you fully commit to what you are doing and exert
yourself to your fullest. When you swing for the fences, throw your
shoulder into it, grin and bear it, give it your all, and go all
in\...you are being forceful.

#### Quick

You act swiftly and with great agility, fast and sure-footed. When you
act without stopping to think, dart and weave, lunge and leap, use quick
reflexes to respond in a hurry, squeeze in an extra little non-action,
dash through before its too late\...you are being quick.

#### Sneaky

You act deceptively, secretively, attempting to avoid notice, in furtive
and surreptitious ways. When you try to conceal or hide what you are
doing, obscure your intentions, evade detection, appear to be other than
what you are, set a trap or lay in ambush\...you are being sneaky.

### Archetypes

Archetypes represent common broad character concepts found in the source
material. The six (6) Archetypes are **Combative, Roguish, Focused,
Arcane, Divine**, and **Primal**; detailed descriptions of each are
provided. Individual characters can specialize in a single Archetype or
mix Archetypes as they like to define various character concepts.

::: {.Example}
For instance, a Cavalier might be defined as Combative +4, while a
\"Fighter/Mage/Thief\" might be defined as Combative +1, Arcane +2,
Roguish +1, and a Ranger might be defined as Combative +2, Primal +2.
:::

Unlike Approaches which cap at Superb (+5), Archetypes do not cap.
However, as characters only get another +1 to a Archetype at major
milestones, progression is generally slow and each opportunity to
advance a Archetype should be carefully considered.

Each Archetype has three thresholds that represent increasing depth of a
character\'s immersion in a particular area of ability, and also
increasing the breadth of what the character can apply the Archetype to
within the context of the story. Thus the difference between a +1 and a
+2 in a given Archetype is more than just a probability bonus; the
higher level of ability also provides expanded narrative justification
for actions pertaining to that Archetype.

For each Archetype, +1 represents **basic knowledge**, fundamental
skill, and general familiarity with the things the Archetype concerns
itself with. In addition to providing a bonus to relevant 4dF
resolutions, in conjunction with the character\'s Aspects and High
Concept the first +1 of a Archetype also helps justify various things
within the narrative. It is left to the GM\'s discretion, but in some
cases a character that has Arcane +1 can justify attempting to do things
in a particular way that a character without Arcane +1 simply cannot
justify, and so on. In other cases a GM might allow characters lacking
at least a +1 in a particular Archetype to attempt something, but at a
cost or versus a higher difficulty\...or both.

For each Archetype, +2 represents **professional competence**. This
threshold is sufficient for all normal purposes for the majority of the
people in the world.

For each Archetype, +3 represents **exceptional competence**. For the
magic oriented Archetypes, +3 is when full unfettered \"free casting\"
is achieved. For the non-magic oriented Archetypes +3 is when truly
extraordinary feats beyond what is possible for \"normal\" people to
accomplish become possible. Only remarkable people (some but not
necessarily all player characters and significant NPC\'s) attain or
exceed this threshold for even a single Archetype.

For each Archetype, +4 and higher represents increasingly **sublime
mastery**. Having a bigger bonus helps to reduce the chance of failure
and makes game-bending exploits statistically probable, but in practical
terms such advanced levels of competence primarily matter when facing
off against other similarly progressed characters.

#### Combative

You have some skill in the warrior arts pertaining to direct armed
conflicts, the waging of war, the winning of battles, and combat in
general. Knowledge of weapons, armor, tactics, as well as the physical
training and discipline necessary to be successful in such endeavors is
relevant as well. This Archetype is strongly associated with conflict,
battle, and martial concerns.

At +1 you know how to use and care for weapons more serious than clubs
and daggers without embarassing yourself, how to wear armor heavier than
leathers, and basic knowledge of martial culture. You don\'t have much
finesse or technique, but are capable of basic strikes and blocks.

At +2 you have genuine skill at arms and are able to put together combos
and flourishes. Depending on your inclinations and background you might
be schooled in at least basic tactics and strategy, and possibly
logistics as well; but even if untutored you can usually spot an ambush,
recognize a defensible position, and so forth.

At +3 and above you are a world-class warrior, capable of impressive
displays of martial mastery. You are capable of taking on large numbers
of unskilled and less competent foes with reasonable odds of beating
them all. Further, Combative provides narrative justification to defend
against not only the mundane attacks it previously protected against,
but also unusual and magical attacks that cause physical harm. This can
take many narrative forms, from blocking, deflecting, using armor or
shield effectively, or even just being extra tough due to being a
hardened warrior.

#### Roguish

You are a competent, skilled individual of varied talents. This
Archetype is strongly associated with urban \'civilized\' concerns,
social rules and expectations, and how to bend or break them.

At +1 you are good at cagey social interaction, have some innate
shrewdness or are streetwise, and are good at being opportunistic. You
are comfortable in urban areas and know how to handle yourself
competently in such settings. You have some practical insider knowledge
of the sector of society you are most familiar with and how things
really work therein.

At +2 you are good at skulking around in urban areas, stealing things,
getting in and out of places you shouldn\'t be in, dirty tricks
\'dishonorable\' fighting using pragmatic weapons true warriors tend to
disapprove of, being shifty and evasive, and likely some knowledge of
the less than lawful sector of society.

At +3 and above you are incredibly competent, deeply knowledgeable in
your area of expertise, and are capable of succeeding at tasks beyond
the reach of the less skilled. Additionally, Roguish provides narrative
justification to defend against any kind of indirect or surprise attack
and to avoid harm by getting out of the way of it. Narratively this can
take many forms, such as rolling out of the way, ducking behind cover,
\'seeing it coming\' and somehow interupting the attack, and so forth.

#### Focused

You are innately good at concentrating your inner power and physical
potential into potent expressions of your will. This Archetype is
strongly associated with athletics, contests of merit, creative
expression, and innate ability.

At +1 you are more nimble, athletic, alert, and have a stronger force of
personality than average. You are unusually aware of your own physical
and mental limits and how far you can push against them to excel. You
are better than average at fisticuffs, staying aware of your
surroundings, and dodging.

At +2 you excel at feats of strength and of will, making uncanny leaps
of intuition, impressive grappling and unarmed fighting, raw athletic
exploits, perseverance in the face of adversity, tapping inner reserves,
and so forth.

At +3 and above you are capable of impossible leaps, gate-crashing
strength, inescapable grappling holds, astounding memory tricks, cowing
entire crowds with sheer presence, and similar feats. Additionally,
Focused provides narrative justification for extraordinary feats
unattainable by merely normal people, though the nature of these
abilities will vary according to the character\'s concept. Some achieve
such heights of mental and / or physical mastery that they develop
amazing monkish, psionic, or even innate \"spell-like\" abilities (if
such things are appropriate to the campaign). It is also more likely for
a character with this level of ability to avoid, shake off, or otherwise
resist effects beyond the tolerence of a normal person to overcome; for
instance withstand a poison that would kill a normal man, spot something
too fast or subtle for most to perceive, resist or break out of mind
control or domination, survive a fall from a great height, and so on.

#### Arcane

You are skilled in the mystic arts, whether wizardly, sorcerous, bardic,
or some other style. This Archetype is strongly associated with esoteric
knowledge, otherworldly things, and manipulation of \"magical
principles\".

At +1 you have relevant esoteric knowledge and awareness of magic, and
you can use some magic items such as wands and scrolls that other
characters can\'t use.

At +2 you can work simple spells such as levitating small objects,
making magical light, shooting minor arcane blasts, and gain various
momentary benefits from minor magical effects.

At +3 and above you can cast proper spells with more powerful effects,
as appropriate to your character\'s concept.

#### Divine

You are attuned to deific entities, theology, and things of cosmological
significance. This Archetype is strongly associated with spiritual
concerns, temples, the afterlife, and faith.

At +1 you have some basic theological knoweldge and a connection to a
deity, or a pantheon of deities, or possibly a philosophy or ideal such
as \"Law\". You might have other associated abilities (such as Stunts)
granted to you by a patron deity or as a byproduct of your observance of
the tenets of your belief system.

At +2 you can attempt to ask for or channel minor divine intersession
and aid, such as a blessing of favor, or healing a minor wound.

At +3 and above you can invoke much more powerful effects, equivalent in
power to that possible with Arcane and Primal at higher
levels\...perhaps even \'miracles\'.

#### Primal

You are skilled in the ways of the wildlands. This Archetype is strongly
associated with rural and unsettled areas, the circle of life, animistic
beliefs, and the fundamental (dare it be said, \"primal\") forces and
principles of material existence.

At +1 you are comfortable in and have knowledge of the lore of the flora
and fauna native to your chosen terrain or environment. You can hunt and
survive and move stealthily in the wildlands.

At +2 you are attuned to the natural order, and have some craft that
blurs the line between mundane and mystical, such as calming animals,
passing without trace through undergrowth, divining water, and so forth.

At +3 and above you can work very powerful magics related to flora and
fauna, the natural order, the weather, and the elements including the
Inner \"Elemental Planes\" and other planes of existence with a strong
connection to nature if such exist in the cosmology of the campaign.

### Assigning Starting Bonuses

Character creation is slightly modified from standard Fate Accelerated
rules.

Characters start with **one Fair (+2), two Average (+1), and three
Mediocre (+0)** Approaches.

However, you also get **four +1\'s** to distribute any way you like
among the six Archetypes of **Combative, Roguish, Primal, Focused,
Arcane, and Divine**. You can assign your four +1\'s however you like;
you could take +1 on four different Archetypes or +4 on the same
Archetype or any other combination adding up to +4.

#### Limiting Starting Archetypes

Some GM\'s may prefer to limit starting characters Archetypes at Good
(+3) or even Fair (+2). That\'s fine, but note that this will prevent
many character concepts from being fully realized as starting
characters.

It might be helpful to realize that in terms of competency, starting
Pathfinder Fate Accelerated characters are roughly equivalent to 5th or
6th level Pathfinder characters. GM\'s that would prefer to start their
campaign off at a higher or lower competency level should consult the
[starting power level options](#starting-power-level-options) guidelines
for more information on how to go about doing that.

#### Taking Actions With Approaches And Archetypes

When taking actions, you get to add one (1) Approach and up to one (1)
Archetype if one applies to the situation; thus a character with
Forceful +2 and Combative +2 would gain +4 when being Forcefully
Combative.

Archetypes can be applied to all four actions (Create Advantage,
Overcome, Attack, Defend).

##### Defending With Archetypes

Archetypes can always defend against themselves directly without need of
extra narrative support.

For instance you can always defend against an opponent\'s Arcane with
your Arcane.

Defending against a Archetype with a different Archetype is possible,
but it requires some narrative support (i.e. you have to creatively
explain how you are using the Archetype in the situation), and if it
doesn\'t seem plausible it doesn\'t work, or works at a penalty.
However, some Archetypes explicitly provide narrative support for
defending against various things when a character passes a threshold of
ability.

For instance Roguish +3 and higher explicitly allows a character to
justify defending against any kind of indirect or surprise attack and to
avoid harm by getting out of the way of it.

### Milestones and Advancement

Approaches cannot be raised above Superb (+5), as is normal for Fate
Accelerated. Archetypes on the other hand are not capped and can be
raised as high as a character is able to progress.

At **minor milestones**, Pathfinder Fate Accelerated doesn\'t change
anything; just use the rules as written in the Fate Accelerated
rulebook.

At **significant milestones**, again nothing is changed. You may raise
an Approach by +1, as normal. You may not raise a Archetype by +1.

At **major milestones** in addition to the various things you are
already allowed to do, in Pathfinder Fate Accelerated you may also raise
*either* an Approach *or* a Archetype by +1, your choice.

Unlike Approaches you generally cannot switch your Archetypes around
after play starts. A GM might allow you to take a +1 off of a Archetype
and put it on a different Archetype during a milestone if you can make a
strong enough case for it, but this should be an uncommon
occurrence\...perhaps in conjunction with a change of High Concept.

## Stunts

A number of additional Stunt templates and options are provided in the
[Stunt Options](#stunt-options) section.

Stunts allow you to differentiate your character. They represent the
\"signature\" abilities or items or *whatever* that makes your character
really stand out.

Aspects cost Fate points to invoke for mechanical benefits, Stunts
usually don\'t (though some very powerful Stunts might). Thus in
addition to offering you a way to individualize your character, Stunts
also allow you to \"pin down\" the things that your character is
*reliably good at*.

Is your character supposed to be a \"swashbuckling sword-master\"? You
would almost certainly have an Aspect to anchor that (it might even be
your High Concept), but to really ensure that your character is *always*
awesome at it when it mechanically matters (i.e. a dice roll is
involved) without having to spend a Fate point for a bonus, you should
define one or more related Stunts.

You get up to **3 Stunts for free**. You can also take more Stunts by
lowering your Refresh by one (1) for each additional Stunt.

However, **player characters cannot drop below Refresh: 1**. Thus, when
starting, you can take up to two (2) additional Stunts. You gain +1
Refresh at major milestones, and can use this to take more Stunts if you
like.

You don\'t have to pick your free Stunts if you don\'t want to or
aren\'t sure. You can start play and pick later, even during the course
of the game if the GM allows it.

You can also swap a Stunt at milestones, so if you take a Stunt that
seems like it would be cool but it doesn\'t play out so well, you can
change your mind later.

## Stress

Pathfinder Fate Accelerated uses the default Fate Accelerated settings
of **3 Stress boxes**, shared for all kinds of stresses.

## Consequences

Pathfinder Fate Accelerated uses the default Fate Accelerated settings
for **shared Mild, Moderate, and Severe Consequences**.

## Magic

By default, it is assumed that the [Simple Magic
Guidelines](#simple-magic-guidelines) are being used.

## Money and Equipment

Though simulating some of the tropes of D&D style gaming, Pathfinder
Fate Accelerated isn\'t a loot-based game. PC\'s don\'t generally wander
around \"killing things and taking their stuff\". The focus is on
allowing players to cooperatively tell a dynamic story full of
excitement with a focus on the \"fiction\"\...which is to say cinematic
or prose-worthy narratives.

Unlike a more loot oriented game where over the course of adventuring
characters accumulate power-ups in item form and eventually become
walking magical weapon platforms defined more by their swag than
anything else, in Pathfinder Fate Accelerated trappings are only useful
to the extent that they help describe and enrich a character concept and
further the story.

Thus, these guidelines take a very loose, abstracted stance on character
trappings and wealth rather than bog things down with crunch.

### Money

Pathfinder Fate Accelerated doesn\'t concern itself about the economy in
the game setting a GM is using, or defining \"starting funds\", or even
tracking money by default.

From a character definition perspective, wealth or a significant lack of
it should be reflected in a character\'s High Concept and / or Aspects,
and that is sufficient.

Unless the GM objects, gear can just be written out narratively as
trappings without worrying about associated monetary considerations.

If you are a player, ask your GM how they plan to handle money in their
campaign. Then seed your character with trappings appropriate to their
concept, taking your GM\'s guidance on what they\'ll allow into account.

If you are a GM, the [Money
Options](http://www.killershrike.com/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Guidelines/MoneyOptions.aspx)
section goes into detail on various options and recommendations on how
to handle economic considerations in Pathfinder Fate Accelerated.

### Equipment

Pathfinder Fate Accelerated handles mundane equipment narratively, as
just a written out list of stuff.

For instance, the salty second mate turned treasure hunter
[Lirrial](http://www.killershrike.com/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Lirrial/Lirrial.aspx)
starts with the following trappings:

::: {.Example}
She had a pile of money just two days ago, won at the tables\...sadly
she bet and lost most of it an hour later, and has drunk the remainder
since. She currently has 3 sp, 16 cp and (inexplicably) two dried lima
beans, a button to somebody else\'s coat, and some lint in her pocket.

She also has a seabag containing a couple of spare pairs of fine sailing
outfits, a journal with a spotty and unreliable account of her deeds,
and a broken music box that only has three and a half working teeth and
thus plays a rather jagged tune. Even on land she wears a jaunty
tri-corner hat suitable to a second-mate-for-hire, and always, always
carries a deceptively deadly rapier with a fancy basket hilt, and keeps
a stiletto well tucked away.
:::

This is a rather flowery write up, but it tells us a lot about the
character and suggests even more. The shifty Sczarni swordsman
[Eleo](http://www.killershrike.com/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Eleo/Eleo.aspx)
on the other hand has these trappings, which is much more direct but
also in its way tells us some things about Eleo\'s nature:

::: {.Example}
Eleo currently has a mere 4 gp, 12 sp, and 45 cp to his name.
Considering the illicit wealth he came from this would depress most
people. But for Eleo it is just another kind of freedom from his past.

Eleo carries two expertly crafted swords, two back-up daggers, and wears
fine medium hybrid armor and stalker boots.
:::

#### Relevance of Specific Weapons and Armor

While different weapons and armor certainly inform the narrative and
help provide justifications as to what makes sense for a given character
to be able to do in a scene or exchange, mechanically \"weapons\" and
\"armor\" have no real significance as attack and defend actions are
resolved using Approaches and Archetypes rather than gear.

The character\'s competency is the primary factor; the tool they are
using to exercise that competency is secondary and only matters to the
extent that it makes the story more interesting.

For instance, the detail that a particular character wields a spear
might provide different justifcations for create advantage and overcome
actions than if the character carried an axe instead. But when the
character uses Combatives to *attack*  another character, unless there
is some other consideration involved it doesn\'t matter mechanically
whether they are using an axe or a sword or a spear or a whatever. The
attack is resolved with a 4dF roll adding an Approach and Combatives to
the result.

To the extent that a particular kind of weapon or armor (etc) matters to
a character or to the emerging story, it should be incorporated into
Aspects and Stunts.

For instance, the fact that
[Bordos](http://www.killershrike.com/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Bordos/Bordos.aspx)
wears heavy armor and wields a hammer is reflected in his Aspects and
Stunts. It is important to the character\'s concept and thus in the
scenes that he is in he makes it matter to the narrative. On the other
hand if Joe Fighterdude usually wears some heavy armor and uses a
warhammer but didn\'t incorporate any of that into his concept in the
form of Aspects or Stunts then ultimately it doesn\'t actually matter as
anything more than fluff.

#### Magic Items

:::tip
A variety of [sample magic items] are available for reference and
reuse.
:::

Of course, in a Fantasy setting Magic is always the special case. By
their very nature magic items can\'t be hand waved away as easily.

Pathfinder Fate Accelerated makes a distinction between permanent magic
items (or items with so many \"charges\" that they are very long
lasting) and expendable magic items with one or a few uses.

##### Expendable Items

In general, Pathfinder Fate Accelerated handles expendable items like
Scrolls and Potions using a modified Mook template that are either
explicitly single use or have a small stress track to track usages. They
don\'t require a Stunt or anything mechanical, they are just a thing a
character carries until they use it up or give the item away or it is
taken from them. They are merely a commodity.

For instance:

:::description
###### Scroll Of Dimension Door

**Aspects**

-   Magical Spell Trapped On Paper
-   Faintly Magical (Universal)

**Benefit**

-   +4 to cast Dimension Door.

**Uses**

-   \[1\]\
    Each usage box indicates a seperate use or application and each use
    expends a usage box; when there are none left the item is expended.

This item requires Arcane +1 or better to use.

:::description
###### Dimension Door

**Aspects**

-   Arcane Spell (Universal)
-   Teleportation

Overcome while Cleverly Arcane to immediately teleport myself a short
distance by overcoming a difficulty equal to the number of zones away
the target is, +1. Thus to dimension door up to three (3) zones away
would require me to overcome a Great (+4) difficulty, while five (5)
zones would require me to overcome a Fantastic (+6) difficulty. When
using this ability, I can not move a zone in the normal way, and if I
fail the spell I go nowhere at all.
:::
:::

:::description
###### Potion Of Cure Moderate Wounds

**Aspects**

-   Potion In A Flask
-   Faintly Magical (Healing)

**Benefit** - A character may drink the potion as an action to \'cast\'
the spell Heal on themselves. Treat this as if the overcome attempt
succeeded with four (4) shifts of effect.

**Uses**

-   \[1\]\
    Each usage box indicates a seperate use or application and each use
    expends a usage box; when there are none left the item is expended.

:::description
###### Heal

**Aspects**

-   Divine Spell (Healing)

While Carefully Divine, attempt to clear a specific stress box or
Consequence by overcoming a difficulty equal to the numerical value of
the stress box or Consequence.
:::
:::

##### Permanent Items

Permanent items are generally represented as a Stunt, but more
complicated or potent items are represented by a Stunt that takes one or
more Stunt slots and attaches a secondary character (aka \"Mook\") write
up to the character, as described in the [Stunt Options](#stunt-options)
section. Items that are a strong part of a character\'s core concept
should also be anchored by an Aspect.

For instance
[Orlo](http://www.killershrike.com/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Orlo/Orlo.aspx)
starts play with a magical sword, but the sword is an heirloom passed
down to Orlo via a long lineage and is a core element of Orlo\'s origin
thus far; this importance is represented by both a Stunt and an Aspect.

Unlike more loot based games, the GM doesn\'t \"reward\" players by
handing out treasure and items, as anything other than story elements,
or to decorate a scene or character while it narratively makes sense.
And unless a PC internalizes a \"found item\" into their concept by
incorporating it into a personal Aspect or Stunt, the item is just not
that important to the emerging story and will drop out of the narrative
when it makes sense for it to do so.

Similarly, if there is something presented in the story such as a
\"magic item\" carried by a defeated enemy for instance, a PC might
temporarily carry it around as represented by a situational Aspect, but
permanently acquiring the \"magic item\" would likely be at the expense
of an Aspect and / or Stunt. If the new shiny is not important to the
character\'s concept then it really just doesn\'t have any relevance to
the character\'s ongoing story and is merely a passing detail.

## Modified Fate Ladder

The modified Fate Ladder adds a few more named rungs above Legendary
(+8). You can, of course, still go higher as need be, but the extra
named rungs should be sufficient for low, mid, and most high-powered
play.

| Rung   | Label          |
| ------ | -------------- |
| +12    | Otherworldly   |
| +11    | Mythic         |
| +10    | Wondrous       |
| +9     | Astonishing    |
| +8     | Legendary      |
| +7     | Epic           |
| +6     | Fantastic      |
| +5     | Superb         |
| +4     | Great          |
| +3     | Good           |
| +2     | Fair           |
| +1     | Average        |
| +0     | Mediocre       |
| -1     | Poor           |
| -2     | Terrible       |

Pathfinder is a High Fantasy setting with big rats, oozes, and rabid
goblins at the low end and demon lords, deities, and otherworldly powers
at the high end.

In standard Fate Accelerated, Approaches cap at Superb (+5), and that is
true in Pathfinder Fate Accelerated as well. But **Archetypes do not
cap**, and are added to resolutions as applicable.

Thus, experienced Pathfinder Fate Accelerated characters can generate
very large bonuses, allowing them to accomplish unearthly feats and
overcome nigh-impossible challenges.

A Pathfinder Fate Accelerated character with around six major milestones
under their belt should be roughly equivalent to a \"20th level
character\" in the source material. Such experienced characters can
potentially generate bonuses of +15 or even higher in their main areas
of expertise.

This is expected, and intended. For most play groups and campaigns it
will all work out. Very few campaigns would progress beyond a few major
milestones in the first place, rendering power scaling at higher
echelons of ability a moot point.

For campaigns that do make it to the higher end of play, or which start
at a higher power level to begin with, the 4dF dice roll has a nearly
insignificant effect on resolutions unless the characters are facing
similarly powerful opposition.

Fortunately, being a narrative game, Fate Accelerated tolerates this
just fine. Simply handle inconsequential resolutons narratively and save
the dice rolling for situations where the variance of +/- 4 from a 4dF
roll might have a meaningful effect on the outcome.

In context, this means that most resolutions between very powerful
endgame characters and lesser opponents should just be narratively
asserted in most cases. Not only is this perfectly reasonable (Archmages
and world-class warriors are at most inconvenienced by stock
opposition), it helps keep the game focused on interesting challenges by
not wasting time diceing out resolutions with a basically foregone
conclusion. A quick narration between the player(s) and GM about what
happened, roughly how long it took, and what it cost the hero (if
anything) is generally sufficient.

::: {.Example}
Example: the [Aspiring Archwizard,
Amarzedrin](http://www.killershrike.com/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Amarzedrin/Epic/Amarzedrin.aspx)
can generate up to a +14 bonus on his prepared spells, allowing him to
cast truly epic magic. When faced with a mob of unruly but otherwise
unexceptional ork mooks with a bonus of +2 on their best Good At, it is
entirely reasonable for Amarzedrin\'s player and the GM to just agree
that it takes mere moments for Amarzedrin to burn the lot of them to
cinders at the cost of a prepared Fireburst spell and not bother with
dice or direct conflict.

Afterall, the goal of the story probably isn\'t to explore all the many
ways Amarzedrin can make the lives of minions such as these miserable
and abruptly shorter; presumably there is a challenge more worthy of his
epicness lurking deeper in the story.
:::

# Simple Magic Guidelines

This section provides guidelines for a simple and fast magic system
utilizing the four standard actions of Fate Accelerated.

## Mystical Archetypes

The mystical Archetypes of **Arcane, Divine, and Primal of +3** or
better allow on the fly casting of more significant and powerful magic
spells and prayers, using the standard four actions of Fate Accelerated
per the guidelines given in this section.

The mystical Archetypes of **Arcane, Divine, and Primal of +2** allow a
character to cast minor \"spells\" or \"blessings\", using these
guidelines.

In terms of the source material, this is the realm of \"0 level\"
cantrips and orisons, and the occasional \"1st level\" spell or prayer.

The mystical Archetypes of **Arcane, Divine, and Primal of +1** allow a
character to have basic topical knowledge of the applicable realm of
expertise, and to use Scrolls, Wands, Fetishes, and similar \"spell
completion\" items keyed to the applicable category of magic. However,
this level of ability is insufficient for a character to cast spells.

### Psionics, Ki & Spell-like Abilities

These guideline can also be applied to characters using **Focused** to
accomplish Psionics, Wuxia style ki / chi abilities, spell-like
abilities, or other similar not-exactly-magic-but-may-as-well-be
effects, with merely a change of theme.

:::sidebar
#### Option: A Few Known Spells

Effects more powerful than cantrips are beyond the +2 level of ability
(unless the character is taking advantage of the [Prepared
Casting](#prepared-casting) Option, trading the ability to free cast
more spells for increased potency and reliability).

But to allow a character to get concrete benefit out of a +2 in one of
these Archetypes without lowering the bar on access to serious magic,
the GM can allow a player to define between two and five minor \"1st
level\" equivalent spells / prayers that their character knows and is
able to use per these guidelines.

Such a character might be able to \"learn\" more minor spells as they
discover them in their travels, until such a time as the character gains
a +3 in their Archetype and graduates to master status and can freely
cast spells.

[Skoth](http://www.killershrike.com/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Adventures/DawnOfTheShatteredStar/Chapters/Chapter2/Skoth/Skoth.aspx),
a character with Arcane +2, demonstrates this option.
:::

## Spellcasting Classes

The degree of strict or open-ended adherence to the source material is
left open to a given GM or group\'s preferences.

However, by default within this material the clearly delineated classes
of the source material are not being imprinted on Fate Accelerated as
anything other than inspiration.

So for instance \"Wizard\" vs \"Sorcerer\" vs \"Witch\" vs \"Magus\" vs
all the many and sundry prestige classes and variants is meaningful only
to the extent that it is echoed within a character\'s Aspects, choice of
Stunts, and general flavor; functionally it is all just Arcane.

### Source Material As Inspiration

Players and the GM are free to think up and suggest their own spell
effects, but on top of that the source material (i.e. Pathfinder)
provides copious spell lists to draw inspiration from and also to
suggest what sorts of effects are permissible.

:::tip
The [Pathfinder System Reference Document](http://www.d20pfsrd.com/)
provides an online reference library of all the open licensed content,
including spell lists and [hundreds of
spells](http://www.d20pfsrd.com/magic/all-spells).
:::

In many cases, a spell\'s name taken directly from the source material
or something extrapolated from it can be used straight up as the name
for a situational Aspect with an agreed upon meaning interpreted from
the spell\'s effect in the source material. There is nothing wrong with
this approach, and it can allow players familiar with any version of D&D
to boldly proclaim things like ***\"I cast Wall Of Fire!\"*** or
***\"Sleep!\"*** or ***\"Explosive Runes!\"*** without requiring a lot
of up front discussion about what that actually means.

### Justification

Pathfinder FAE takes the general stance that \"classes\" and the
categorization of magic into Arcane, Divine, Primal is partially just
fluff and flavor, and partially an artifact of a regimented \"class and
level\" system.

The Pathfinder FAE premise is that what really matters in all things is
**NARRATIVE JUSTIFICATION**, capitalized for effect because it is
*really important*.

For purposes of spellcasting, the most important question to be asked is
*\"What narrative effects does this particular spellcaster\'s concept
justify?\"*. If a given spell feels out of character for a given
spellcaster, it should be taken as a sign that something is amiss.

:::tip
Pro Tip: for a given spellcasting character constantly ask, \"given this
character\'s concept and past exploits, what effects on the narrative
are \"in bounds\" or \"out of bounds\" for them when using their
magic?\".
:::

## Tale Of The Tape

Generally, Pathfinder FAE suggests that a player of a magic using
character attempting to introduce a new spell or effect to the narrative
should first consider if there is anything in their character\'s
Aspects, Stunts, Approach allocations, and how the character has been
portrayed thus far that suggests that the spell or effect is or should
be part of their character\'s repertoire.

:::tip
Pro Tip: If a player tries to justify a spell or effect and the GM and /
or other players do not think it sounds legit, that is direct feedback
that the rest of the group does not consider the effect of the spell to
be \"in bounds\" for the character.

Often times, one or more suggestions of an effect that people feel is
more appropriate to the character and the situation might be forthcoming
from the rest of the table.
:::

If a given group is trying to adhere to the source material pretty
closely, they will already have some notions about what kind of
\"spells\" are and are not in bounds for a \"Wizard\" or a \"Cleric\" or
a \"Druid\", etc.

Does it make sense that a \"Wizard\" can hurl a lightning bolt from his
hands? The source material says yes.

A \"Cleric\"? The source material generally says no, but if they have an
Aspect analogous to the \"Lightning Domain\", then sure.

A \"Druid\"? The source material says\...not exactly\...but they can
pull a lightning bolt down from the sky for a similar effect because
that fits their shtick of \"manipulating the environment\" better.

However, the concepts of the source material can be followed as closely
as the play group desires, or not at all. Whatever makes for a more
engaging game for that group is the correct way to go.

### Omnipotence Is Narratively Boring

Though it might seem unintuitive, players should consider that a
spellcaster that can cast any spell they want any time they like is
actually quite boring from a narrative perspective as they can\'t be
properly challenged and thus there is no dramatic tension involved in
that character\'s evolving story.

Generally characters that have a well defined shtick and work within it
to find clever solutions tend to be more relatable and narratively
interesting, and this is as true for a magic using character as any
other Archetype.

### GM Veto

While Pathfinder FAE players have a tremendous amount of agency to
define their own character concept and pursue lines of play that are
interesting to them, ultimately if they find it necessary to do so the
GM can veto a spell or effect that they do not think is narratively
justified in a given scene, or that they think is out of bounds for a
given character.

:::tip
Pro Tip: GM veto should be exercised with care. There is a fine balance
to maintain between permissiveness in the interests of fun vs.
protecting the long term health of a campaign.
:::

A GM that doesn\'t feel comfortable saying \"No\", or who is ok with a
particular effect being used occasionally but not always, can just dial
the difficulty up a few notches.

:::tip
Pro Tip: a generally more interesting way to handle things (assuming
they are not potentially plot-destroying) is for the GM to \"say Yes\",
but raise the difficulty commensurately to how unlikely they think
success should be. The player can then decide if they still want to make
the attempt, or change their mind.
:::

But even a GM that is reluctant to say \"No\" can and should veto any
effect that ruins the fun of the game for the group as a whole or
jeopardizes the long term health of the game.

:::tip
Pro Tip: The GM should beware of effects that assert game mechanics over
the narrative as they can strongly erode the point of using a narrative
system such as Fate Accelerated in the first place.
:::

## Martial / Caster Disparity

By default, there is no \"martial / caster disparity\" in Fate
Accelerated. A \"wizard\" using magic to attack, overcome, create
advantage, or defend is using the same four actions as a \"fighter\"
using their martial competence to attack, overcome, create advantage, or
defend.

However, all of that intrinsic balance pivots on the fulcrum of
justification. A character that can justify nearly anything can attempt
more things than a character that can only justify a narrow range of
things, and thus will have more overall impact on the story as their
relevance to unfolding events is higher.

A more narrowly defined character that cannot justify very many effects
might still be more reliable within their specialty, but will have a
difficult time remaining relevant in the long term.

:::tip
Pro Tip: if a GM finds that after a while most of their players seem to
want to play some kind of spellcaster, they should ask themselves if
they are being too lenient with what they allow magic users to justify,
or too strict on what they allow non-spellcasters justify.

Non-mystical characters with high **Combatives**, **Roguish**, and
**Focused** should be equally able to justify impressive effects
appropriate to their shticks as spellcasters can within theirs.
:::

Thus if spellcasting is allowed to be a blank check that can justify
anything, and non-spellcasters are prohibited from using their abilities
in similarly flexible ways, the classic martial / caster disparity will
rear its head once again despite the system itself not asserting it.

## Approaches With Magic

With narrative support, just about any Approach can theoretically be
used for any sort of magic. However, there is synergy to be had by at
least loosely tying certain kinds of spell effects to thematically
appropriate Approaches.

**Careful** is good for rituals and spells that require fiddly
components and precision, and conjurations.

**Clever** is good for divinations and crafty transmutations, and so
forth.

**Flashy** is good for area affecting magic, prismatic spells and
anything big, loud, colorful, or otherwise splashy and obvious.

**Forceful** is good for direct attacks and flat assertions or negations
such as some abjuration effects.

**Quick** is good for simple effects, charms or other effects mixed in
with a mundane activity, and reactive / defensive magic.

**Sneaky** is good for illusions, some enchantments, shadow magic,
shapechanging magic used to deceive, and magic that lacks obvious
tell-tales.

## Defend With Magic

Each mystic Archetype can be used to **Defend** against itself. If one
character uses Arcane to attack another character, the target can defend
with Arcane, and so on. It\'s as simple as that. You can think of this
as \"counter-magic\", or a \"saving throw\", or just a neat feature of
the rules as you like.

If a character wants to use a Archetype to defend across a different
Archetype vector like Divine types who want their \"god to protect
them\" against non-Divine threats, or an Arcanist who wants to gain some
physical protection from their Arcane skills without having to spend
actions setting up \"protective spells\" via Create Advantage (and so
on) a Stunt can be taken to enable that. For instance:

:::description
**Arcane Aegis**: Because I have mastered protecting myself with magic,
I may use Arcane to defend against physical attacks without needing to
first create an advantage to invoke.
:::

:::description
**Divine Aegis**: Because my patron deity protects me I may use Divine
to defend against non-Divine magical and unusual attacks without needing
to first create an advantage to invoke, unless I have recently done
something unworthy of my faith.
:::

:::description
**Primal Resistance**: Because my primal nature and elemental affinity
protects me, I may use Primal to defend against non-Primal magical
attacks without needing to first create an advantage to invoke.
:::

## Attack With Magic

Damage spells are generally just resolved using the **Attack** action.
It usually doesn\'t need to be any more complicated than that. Describe
the nature of the attack, choose the Approach that seems to best apply
to the situation, the caster adds that Approach to their relevant
mystical Archetype, and rolls 4dF.

Range is fiddly as spells in the source material vary widely and Fate
Accelerated abstracts such things.

As a rule of thumb it is useful to assume that **attack spells can
target opponents within the same zone or an adjacent zone**.

A caster has the option to either take a one (1) shift penalty or spend
an extra exchange of \"casting\" for each additional two (2) zones of
distance.

### Higher Level Attack Spells?

There aren\'t larger dice or bigger dice pools involved, so there\'s no
point to stratification with \"higher level\" spells that do more damage
than \"lower levels\" spells. A character with Arcane +5 adds two (2)
more shifts than a character with Arcane +3 and thus inflicts two extra
shifts of stress on average. Higher Archetype means more damage,
basically.

### Multiple Targets

Fate Accelerated handles affecting multiple targets by rolling for
effect and then splitting shifts to allocate to multiple targets. This
seems to create a bit of a friction point, as in the source material
many spellcaster\'s main combat advantage is the ability to blow up
groups of enemies with spells like Fireball and Chain Lightning.

Depending on how the GM treats \"mooks\" (nameless opponents), this
isn\'t necessarily an actual issue. If the GM opts to treat a pack of
nameless opponents as a single mob, the narrative effect of a Fireball
type effect isn\'t lost as the mob\'s shared stress track respresents
multiple notional \"targets\".

Regardless, it will often prove inefficient to split shifts between
nameless mooks and named NPC\'s with full write ups. For one, named
characters with the standard array of consequences are durable in Fate
Accelerated, benefiting from a good deal of \"plot protection\".
Secondly, from a pragmatic perspective, a capable named NPC with a full
write up will often be able to defend against a measly few shifts of
damage.

Yet, again, this isn\'t necessarily the end of the story. It is fully
expected that many named NPC\'s with full write ups are important enough
to the story (else, why bother with full write ups), that the GM will
often have them concede should consequences start piling up. Character
death is a narrative decision in Fate Accelerated, and this is as true
for significant NPC\'s as it is for player characters. Thus, even though
it is unlikely to take a significant opponent out, spreading some shifts
around with big splashy magical attacks can still encourage concessions.

### Zone Effect

It may sometimes be allowed to cast a spell that attacks everyone in a
zone, but this can be very powerful and must be handled carefully. Many
GM\'s may not want to allow it within the context of a free-casting
magic system where a spellcaster could whip out such effects at will,
and it is the default assumption of Pathfinder Fate Accelerated that
zone affecting attacks are out of bounds for characters.

:::tip
A GM might allow a character using the [Prepared
Casting](#prepared-casting) option to prepare one or more attack spells
that affect a zone. If so, such spells do not benefit from the \"double
your Arcane bonus\" prepared casting beneft. Care should still be taken
to monitor such spells to avoid a \"caster / martial\" disparity.
:::

Instead, one or more Stunts can be taken which impose a frequency of use
such as once per conflict or once per session, and / or a cost to the
user such as a Fate point or a conseqence.

Non spell casters can take this sort of Stunt as well, to demonstrate
martial prowess or unusual competence. For instance,
[Suki](http://www.killershrike.com/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Suki/Suki.aspx)
demonstrates this option.

:::description
**Chained Lightning**: Because I am able to project a bolt of lighting
that jumps from target to target, once per session when I am Flashily
Arcane and attack I may affect all enemy targets in my zone without
having to split my shifts between them.
:::

:::description
**Fireburst**: Because I am able to cause a mystical explosion to occur,
once per session when I am Flashily Arcane and attack I may affect all
targets in up to two contiguous adjacent zones without having to split
my shifts between them. This is non-discriminatory, and often causes
collateral damage.
:::

:::description
**Mana Bolts**: Because I am able to launch target-seeking magical
bolts, when I am Cleverly Arcane and attack I may spend a Fate point
**or** suffer the Mild Consequence **Spell Fatigue** to affect all enemy
targets in an adjacent zone without having to split my shifts between
them.
:::

### Boosts!

Players of spellcasting characters should consider taking advantage of
the Succeed with Style option on Attacks to do one (1) shift less damage
to get a boost. With a little narrative flair, interesting boosts can be
used to add some \"magical\" flavor to an otherwise straightforward
numerical outcome.

## Overcome With Magic

Whenever a caster wants to use their magic as the justification to get
past something, solve a problem, remove a situational Aspect, etc, it is
typically just a standard use of the **Overcome** action.

This is useful for a wide variety of problem-solving spells, like
Dispel, or Knock (using magic to pick a lock, basically), or divining
things, or quickly charming a NPC to get past them, and so forth.

### Beware Of The Universal Tool

This use of magic is the simplest to deal with mechanically, and quickly
resolved in most cases, but it is this facet of magic that has the
potential to allow spellcasters to dominate play. If magic takes on the
role of a \"universal tool\" able to solve any problem, it particularly
steps on Roguish abilities. This is a common problem for magic systems
in general, but particularly \"free-form\" cast on the fly models where
there is no real opportunity cost or need to guess what will be needed
ahead of time.

However, for purposes of Fate Accelerated a GM can solve for this
potential pitfall pretty easily. The most direct and reliable way is to
simply set the difficulty +2 higher (or more) when a character uses
magic to Overcome something that would more typically be solved via
mundane abilities. Thus, there is a real reason to do it the \"hard
way\"; it is more likely to succeed.

A second less reliable but often times more limiting restriction is to
disallow the usage of certain Approaches when using magic to Overcome
some tasks\...particularly **Sneaky**.

In other words, if it is obvious when a character is using magic to
solve a problem in lieu of mundane proficiency, it helps protect the
Roguish bailiwick of doing things without being seen doing them. For
instance, just strolling up to a guard and Flashily casting a charm
spell on them to gain access to whatever they are guarding has a wildly
different possible narrative outcome than a skilled con artist trying
the same thing by bluffing or bribing their way in.

## Create Advantage

Magic that asserts a fact to be true, interacts with or alters some
fundamental trait (i.e. Aspects), modifies the environment, creates some
pervasive long term effect, or otherwise does something lasting, is
typically \"cast\" by using a **Create Advantage** action to apply a
situational Aspect to a target, such as the caster, another character,
an object, or the scene itself.

Note, this kind of situational Aspect is referred to as a **spell
Aspect** herein.

## Limit On The Number Of Spell Aspects

To keep magic users from getting out of hand by just \"buffing\"
themselves or their allies with a bunch of spell Aspects, as a general
rule a character can have a number of spell Aspects equal to their
Archetype active at the same time. Creating a new spell Aspect beyond
that limit causes one of the in play spell Aspects of the player\'s
choice to be cancelled and removed from play.

::: {.Example}
Thus a character with Arcane +3 can maintain three (3) active spell
Aspects at the same time, while an advanced character with Divine +5 can
maintain five (5) active spell Aspects simultaneously.
:::

Spell Aspects gained from other casters or items like Scrolls do not
count against this limit.

## Spellcasting Difficulties

Generally speaking, creating spell Aspects is just a Create Advantage
action and thus the GM simply assesses a base difficulty per their
discretion. Generally the difficulty for a spell Aspect will be based
upon how powerful or pervasive the effect that the Aspect is meant to
represent is.

However, these guidelines make some assumptions that extra shifts will
be available to apply additional attributes to spell Aspects, so GM\'s
using these guidelines are encouraged to be somewhat lenient and not go
much above a Superb (+5) difficulty even for high end effects if the
caster is unopposed.

### Using the Source Material\'s Spell Lists As Inspiration

If using one or more spell lists as inspiration, as a convenient rule of
thumb if the caster is unopposed assume a base difficulty of Mediocre
(+0), and add **half of the source material\'s spell level of the effect
being approximated, rounding up**.

::: {.Example}
Thus, assuming the caster is unopposed, to create a spell Aspect based
on a 1st or 2nd level spell from the source material would be an Average
(+1) difficulty, while creating a spell Aspect based on a 3rd or 4th
level spell would be a Fair (+2) difficulty, and creating a spell Aspect
based on a 9th level spell would be a Superb (+5) difficulty.
:::

However, it is important to remember that this is just a rule of thumb,
not a carved in stone mandate. The GM should feel free to set
difficulties based upon their sense of how impactful a given create
advantage outcome might be, particularly considering that the
spellcasting character\'s player will likely want to use such an effect
more than once over the course of a campaign.

### Setting A Difficulty Is Also Setting A Precedent

The first time a new spell effect is introduced, it puts the GM on the
spot to come up with a workable difficulty. This can be somewhat
problematic as the difficulty chosen will become the precedent the next
time someone casts the same spell or a similar one as casting the same
spell under the same conditions should generally be the same difficulty.
Thus setting a difficulty too high or too low relative to the impact of
the spell, creates problems over time.

As the GM, just try to err on the side of consistency and
sustainability; i.e. set a difficulty that isn\'t so low it creates
later problems when the spell is cast again, nor so high relative to its
effect that no one wants to use the spell anymore as the risk vs reward
is upside down.

Generally, players will be more receptive if you later reduce the
difficulty to cast a particular kind of spell rather than if you go the
opposite direction and assert a higher difficulty on a spell they\'ve
gotten used to casting at a lower difficulty. Thus if you are on the
spot and feel like a spell should be a little more difficult to cast, go
ahead and bump the difficulty up by +1 or even +2 and see how it
goes\...if it proves to not be egregious as you feared you can ratchet
the difficulty down later.

### Success!

The normal rules for Create Advantage apply; successfully creating a
spell Aspect grants one (1) free invoke, and succeeding with style
grants an extra free invoke for two (2) total free invocations.

But in addition to the normal success outcomes, a spellcaster also gets
to apply the extra shifts they rolled for further benefit.

Shifts get split up in various ways to increase duration (two (2) extra
shifts per one (1) time increment up the scale), base difficulty for
other characters to Overcome and remove the spell Aspect (one (1) extra
shift per one (1) higher difficulty), extra invokes (two (2) extra
shifts per one (1) extra invoke), and so forth as seems to make sense in
the moment.

:::tip
Players can keep simple notes on the spell Aspects their characters have
used before with assessed difficulties and basic effects for future
reuse.
:::

### Spell Aspect Base Difficulties To Overcome

Each spell Aspect requires some interpretation on the part of the GM,
but if a spell Aspect creates a situation that can be overcome the spell
Aspect has a base difficulty equal to the difficulty to cast it. The
spellcaster may apply extra shifts to increase the base difficulty.

***One (1) extra shift can be applied to raise the difficulty to
overcome a spell Aspect by one (1), any number of times.***

For instance, a spell with a difficulty of Superb (+5) to cast would
also present at least a Superb (+5) difficulty to overcome for anyone
attempting to get rid of the Aspect. To raise the difficulty to overcome
the spell Aspect to Legendary (+8) would take three (3) extra shifts.

#### Level Of Effect

Many spell Aspects that affect the scene or other characters can be
thought of as having a **\'level of effect\'**, with some being more
powerful than others based upon the skill of the caster and how well or
poorly the spell Aspect was cast.

Unless specifically noted otherwise in a spell Aspect\'s description, if
it is necessary to determine how much effect the Aspect has when it
interacts with the scene or a character, treat the spell Aspect\'s level
of effect as being equal to its difficulty to overcome.

For instance, a spell Aspect with a Legendary (+8) difficulty to
overcome is assumed to also have a Legendary (+8) level of effect unless
a different level of effect is specifically described for the spell.

### Extra Invokes

Unless otherwise noted, spell Aspects function exactly like any other
Aspect, offering narrative flavor but needing to be invoked to provide
any mechanical benefit or to activate.

And though some spell Aspects are primarily passive and mainly serve to
establish a fact (such as **Invisibility** or **Flight**), they can
still reasonably be invoked for a bonus when applicable like any other
Aspect.

As mentioned previously, success grants a free invoke and succeeding
with style grants a total of two (2) free invokes, but extra shifts
beyond success can be allocated to get additional free invokes.

***Two (2) extra shifts can be applied for one (1) additional free
invoke, any number of times.***

Thus if a spellcaster succeeded with style to create a spell Aspect for
two (2) total free invokes but got +4 more than they needed to succeed
on their 4dF roll, they could apply the extra shifts for two (2)
additional free invokes\...a total of four (4) invokes!

### Spell Aspect Durations

Generally speaking, spell Aspect are usually situational Aspects placed
on a target. The target can be a character, a zone, the scene itself, or
any other legal target for an Aspect.

Guidelines are provided for how long spell Aspects last. However, the
narrative always trumps extended duration; **if it no longer makes
sense** for a spell Aspect to exist, it is removed regardless of any
other factor.

#### Active Spell Aspect Durations

Spell Aspects that are direct or overt rather than passive must be
actively invoked to have a meaningful effect, but they usually stick
around until discharged (have no further invokes remaining) even past
the end of scenes. However, they are usually removed from play
immediately once they are out of invokes. Their duration can thus be
extended by gaining more free invokes.

::: {.Example}
For instance, a **Mystical Shield** spell that must be invoked to grant
a +2 bonus on a Defend action, or a **Flaming Sword** spell that must be
invoked to grant a +2 bonus on an Attack action would generally last as
long as they have invokes remaining, but dissipate as soon as their last
invoke is used.
:::

#### Passive Spell Aspect Durations

On the other hand, spell Aspects that are fairly passive and assert
facts into the narrative might last for a scene and possibly longer
unless they are overcome or the narrative suggests that they should be
removed.

Passive spell Aspects that simply assert facts on the narrative can have
their duration increased by allocating two (2) extra shifts per time
increment, or as negotiated with the GM.

::: {.Example}
Thus a spell caster could apply two (2) shifts to make a passive spell
Aspect stick around for two (2) scenes.
:::

### Action Proxies

For more sophisticated spells, it can be useful to use Create Advantage
to create a spell Aspect that can then be invoked later (or triggered by
a narrative event) to cause an Attack, Defend, Overcome, or even a
different Create Advantage action to occur.

To do this, a spellcaster describes the effect they are going for and
what action will be proxied. If the GM agrees, the caster then use
Create Advantage as normal.

However in addition to the things that extra shifts can be allocated
towards, the caster may also allocate some number of shifts to the
proxied action they are attaching to the spell Aspect. The number of
shifts allocated to the proxied action provide the bonus that will be
applied to the proxied action\'s 4dF roll when it is activated later.

If the caster succeeds with style they can choose to gain +1 extra shift
instead of an extra invocation of the proxied action if that makes more
sense for the spell in question.

::: {.Example}
For instance,
[Voxel](http://www.killershrike.com/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Voxel/Voxel.aspx)
uses a Create Advantage action while Sneakily Arcane to attach the
**Exploding Runes** spell Aspect to a location. Narratively, he has
inscribed Explosive Runes underneath a carefully placed book such that
when a victim picks up the book the Runes explode!

The GM sets the Difficulty at Fair (+2). Voxel rolls ++-\[\], and adds
his **Sneaky + Arcane** bonus of +5 for a total of +6. Voxel needed +2
to succeed, so he has 4 extra shifts; he also succeeded with style and
opts for +1 shift. Therefore the Explosive Rune spell Aspect has 5
shifts of effect embedded in it, and will make an Attack roll at +5
whenever it gets triggered later. After it is triggered, the spell
Aspect is removed from the scene.
:::

## Conjuration And Summoning

The source material has a variety of spells that summon an ally or
monster to serve the caster\'s will. Other spells don\'t summon a
creature per se but do create some kind of construct that acts
independently from the caster.

For convenience, let\'s call this sort of \"summoned\" or \"called\" or
\"conjured\" character a **servitor**.

This can be tricky in Fate Accelerated, as the rules don\'t really cover
followers or sidekicks and the like. There is also the concern that a
spellcaster summoning minions has a force multiplying effect, and also
that they can summon minions that offer skill-like abilities or Stunts
that step on the roles of other characters. Basically, this sort of
effect will require quite a lot more adjudication than most other
spells.

### Servitors

Servitors are basically mooks, with a few differences. Like mooks, they
have a simplified profile, and a write-up can represent either an
individual or a \"mob\" that acts together as a group.

Any spellcaster can summon a servitor, regardless of whether they are
**Arcane**, **Divine**, or **Primal** based. Generally, summoning a
servitor is done while being **Careful**.

A servitor is summoned by casting a spell using the Create Advantage
action to attach a spell Aspect to a scene, the caster themselves, or
some other viable target as makes sense. The difficulty to summon a
servitor starts at Mediocre (+0), and goes up for more powerful
servitors.

Mechanically, the servitor spell Aspect anchors the servitor to the
target. It can also be dispelled or removed by characters with
appropriate abilities or narrative justification using the overcome
action; the difficulty to do so is left to the GM\'s discretion but
usually would be equal to the difficulty required to summon the
servitor.

Descriptively, a servitor summoned in this way might appear or arrive in
whatever manner suits the narrative or concept.

A spellcaster can reduce the difficulty to summon a servitor by spending
extra exchanges prior to making the attempt. Each exchange spent
\"casting\", neither moving or taking some other action, prior to making
the 4dF check to create the servitor spell Aspect grants a +1 bonus to
the roll.

#### Baseline Servitor

A baseline servitor gets two Aspects, uses a simple hit box track
starting at zero (0) hit boxes, has one (1) skill-like ability that they
are good at (+2) or two (2) skill-like abilities they are fair at (+1
each), and are either bad at one (1) thing (-2) or poor at two (2)
things (-1 each).

The difficulty for summoning a baseline servitor is Mediocre (+0).

:::description
###### Baseline (Servitor +0)

**Summoning Difficulty**

-   +0

**Aspects**

-   Select two.

**Good At**

-   Spread +2 around 1 to 2 skill-like abilities

**Bad At**

-   Spread -2 around 1 to 2 skill-like abilities
:::

#### Servitor Upgrades

Servitors can be improved upon from the default baseline, but the
summoning difficulty that must be overcome to summon an upgraded
servitor increases commensurately.

The Servitor Improvements chart details how much additional difficulty
is incurred per upgrade. The difficulty increases are cumulative, and
round up.

As a convenience, the difficulty to summon a servitor can be annotated
on the servitor write-up.

Upgraded servitors can be written up on the fly as needed, but to avoid
slowing play a GM might require all servitors to be written up and
approved outside of play time. Existing mook write-ups may be repurposed
as servitors by adding up the mook\'s upgrades to determine the
difficulty. Characters with full write-ups are not mooks and thus cannot
be used as servitors.

| Upgrades                                             | Summoning Difficulty Adjustment   |
| ---------------------------------------------------- | --------------------------------- |
| Traits                                               |                                   |
| Additional Aspect                                    | +.5 each                          |
| Additional +1 \"Good At\" skill-like ability bonus   | +1 each                           |
| -1 Refresh equivalent ability (such as a Stunt)      | +1 each                           |
| Stress Mitigation                                    |                                   |
| Hit Box                                              | +.5 each                          |
| Stress Box (up to \[1\]\[2\]\[3\])                   | +1 each                           |
| Mild Consequence                                     | +1                                |
| Moderate Consequence                                 | +2                                |
| Severe Consequence                                   | +3                                |
| Hindrances                                           |                                   |
| Reducing \"Bad At\" penalty by -1                    | +1 each                           |
| Additional -1 \"Bad At\" penalty                     | -1 each                           |
| Special retrictions                                  | -var                              |

##### Obedient Servitor

A servitor is not necessarily obedient to their summoner, but an
**Obedient** or **Loyal** or similar Aspect can be added to a servitor
to ensure compliancy.

##### Spellcasting Servitor

A servitor can be a spellcaster, but must have a relevant skill-like
ability at +3 or better.

##### Servitor Autonomy and Initiative

Servitors act on their own, but unless they have a skill-like ability,
Aspect, or Stunt that suggests otherwise, they have initiative 0.

##### Stress Boxes vs Hit Boxes

By default, the baseline servitor has zero (0) hit boxes; however it can
be upgraded to have more, with every two additional hit boxes increasing
the difficulty to summon the servitor by +1. There is no cap on how many
hit boxes a servitor might have.

A servitor can have stress boxes instead of hit boxes if desired. Each
additional stress box increases the difficulty to summon the servitor by
+1. The stress boxes follow the normal progression of
**\[1\]\[2\]\[3\]**, must be taken in order, and are capped at \[3\].

A servitor that has a full stress track (**\[1\]\[2\]\[3\]**) can have a
Mild consequence, raising the difficulty to summon the servitor by +1.

A servitor that has a Mild consequence may also have a Moderate
consequence, raising the difficulty to summon the servitor by +1.

A servitor that has a Moderate consequence may also have a Severe
consequence, raising the difficulty to summon the servitor by +1 once
again.

A servitor with a full stress and consequences allotment is
approximately as durable as a full character write up, and may or may
not be able to concede a conflict at the GM\'s discretion.

##### Hindrances

Servitors can have additional \"Bad At\" penalties at the GM\'s
discretion, each -1 penalty reduces the difficulty required to summon
the servitor by -1. However, the GM should ensure that any such
penalties taken are actually relevant and not a min-maxing attempt by a
player.

Servitors can also have various restrictions upon themselves or upon the
summoning of them; such restrictions lower the difficulty to cast the
summoning spell by a variable amount. What constitutes a valid
restriction and how much it lowers the difficulty to summon the servitor
is left to the GM\'s discretion.

Servitors can reduce the default \"Bad At\" penalty the baseline begins
with; each -1 removed raises the summoning difficulty by +1.

::: {.Example}
[Tamara](http://www.killershrike.com/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Tamara/Tamara.aspx)
is Carefully Arcane and uses a Create Advantage action while Carefully
Arcane to attach the **Murder Of Crows** spell Aspect to the scene.

Tamara has summoned a Murder of Crows before and thus there is an
existing write-up; otherwise one would be created on the fly.

Compared to a baseline servitor, the Murder of Crows has some hit boxes,
an extra Aspect, and an extra Good At bonus, which collectively raises
the difficulty to summon such a servitor from Mediocre (+0) to Good
(+3).

Tamara adds her **Careful + Arcane** bonus to a 4dF roll and in this
scenario succeeds at casting the spell. Narratively she utters a
disturbing command, and a swarm of oily black feathered birds converges
upon the area to do Tamara\'s bidding.

:::description
###### Murder of Crows

**Aspects**

-   Arcane Spell (Conjuration)
-   Summoning

Create Advantage while Carefully Arcane vs a Good (+3) difficulty to
attach the spell Aspect **Murder of Crows!** to a target up to two zones
away to summon a mob of angry crows and cause them to attack and harry
the target. See the Murder of Crows servitor profile for details.

Servitors are explained in the [Simple Magic
guidelines](#simple-magic-guidelines).

:::description
###### Murder Of Crows

**Summoning Difficulty**

-   +4

**Aspects**

-   Caw Caw Caw
-   Murder On The Wing
-   Obedient

**Good At**

-   Pecking (+2)
-   Distracting (+1)

**Bad At**

-   No Thumbs (-2)

**Hits**

-   \[1\]\[1\]\[1\]\[1\]
:::
:::
:::

## Save Or Bad

The source material has a variety of \"make a saving throw or a very bad
thing happens\" effects, up to and including the infamous Save Or Die
effects. Fate Accelerated generally does not lend itself to such extreme
and non-narrative outcomes, taking the stance that such absolute and
capricious effects are not fun and have a lot of potential to wreck a
story for no good reason other than randomness.

Nevertheless, many of the Save Or Bad type effects can reasonably be
handled as simple Attacks, with applicable narrative interpretation if
Consequences are suffered. Particularly vs \"mooks\", who are generally
not very durable.

Against mooks, it is often possible to simply make a magic based Attack
and narrate the outcome per the Save Or Bad effect. By this reasoning if
you wipe out a mook or damage a mob of mooks, it doesn\'t really matter
mechanically if you describe the effect as straightforward damage or
something more esoteric such as disintegration or petrification or
banishment.

However named characters with full write ups including standard stress
and consequences generally can not be taken out in one shot from full
health, and will thus be largely exempt from such instant death alpha
strike effects.

From a narrative perspective this is actually a good thing; it prevents
significant NPCs and by extension even entire scenes from getting
anticlimactically one-shotted out of the session. It is also in the
player characters\' best interests in the long run as they enjoy the
same protection. Think of characters with full write ups (vs mook write
ups) as having built in plot protection, or if you must, as having a
better \"saving throw\" than mere minions.

But Save vs Bad effects can still provide inspiration for creative
Consequences. For instance a \"Save vs Petrification\" effect could be
represented as an attack spell, and if a Consequence is applied to the
target as a result of the attack a petrification theme would be applied.
A relevant Mild Consequence might be **Stoned Reflexes**, a Moderate
Consequence might be **Stiffened Joints and Pebbly Skin**, and a Severe
Consequence might be **Partialy Petrified**.

Applying some creative interpretation to Consequences and concessions in
this way opens up a lot of options for handling some of the more
powerful and arbitrarily absolute abilities in the source material.
However, to prevent abuse the GM might want to enforce some opportunity
costs around this kind of overt Consequence manipulation.

### Consequence Manipulation

At the GM\'s discretion, particularly strong, advantageous, or specific
Consequence manipulating abilities or spell Aspects might also require a
character to invest in a Stunt clearly defining how they are able to
impose a Consequence and what benefit they gain from it.

:::description
**Arcane Domination (-2)**: Because of my mastery of mind-affecting
enchantments, while I am Forcefully Arcane I can make mental attacks
against a living target in my zone or an adjacent zone. Consequences
inflicted by this ability pertain to my gaining increasing control over
the target\'s mind. If the target concedes to me, the target must do as
I command in general but retains enough control to avoid doing anything
fundamentally against the target\'s nature. If the target is taken out
with this ability I assume full control of the target\'s behavior until
they are able to recover from the Consequences.
:::

:::description
**Necromantic Enervation**: Because I am a master of necromancy, I am
able to drain the life energy from others. While I am Sneakily Arcane I
can attack others with \'Life Draining\' spells; in addition to the
stress if I inflict a Consequence on my target I afflict them with
enervation and ennui. Consequences such as **Easily Fatigued**, **Fits
Of Ennui**, **Prone To Depression**, and **Sunk Into A Deep Funk** cause
those afflicted to struggle to motivate and empower themselves, to
unexpectedly lose interest in being active, become unconcerned about
succeeding in their endeavors, and so forth. If a target is taken out in
this way, they die and rise again as an Undead minion that I can control
for the remainder of the scene and possibly longer at the GM\'s
discretion.
:::

:::description
**Enchanting Empathy**: Because I am a master of enchantment magics that
allow me to manipulat the emotional states of others, while I am
Cleverly Arcane I can engage a target in a social conflict and if I
inflict a Consequence I can afflict them with a propensity for a
specific emotion. Consequences such as **Fits Of Uncontrollable Rage**,
**Plunged Into Deep Sadness**, **Gripped By Passionate Love**, and
**Overwhelmed By Euphoric Happiness** incite those afflicted to act out
in ways appropriate to the emotional state I have imposed on them. If,
while I share a scene with the target, a Consequences I have inflicted
with this ability is compelled and the target spends a fate point to
refuse the compel, I gain the fate point immediately.
:::

A collection of [simple magic options](#simple-magic-options) are
provided to extend this magic system further with things like prepared
casting, alchemists, elementalists, and so forth.

:::tip
A collection of [sample spells](#sample-spells) is available for
reference and reuse.
:::


# Simple Magic Options

This section collects options to expand the [Simple Magic
Guidelines](#simple-magic-guidelines) with more complicated elements. A
group might use none, some, or all of the offered options as they see
fit.

## Scrolls

Any magic user might use trappings like a scroll for cosmetic purposes,
or scrolls and similar items can just be handled as a purely narrative
consideration.

It is also possible to have more detailed Scroll write ups with a
defined effect and some number of usages. This sort of Scroll is an
expendable magic item that can be acquired and carried around until
expended or dropped without requiring a character to have an Aspect or
Stunt to justify having it. They do however require the character to
have at least +1 in the relevant mystical capability to use the Scroll.

When a character uses this sort of Scroll, they are actually casting the
spell using the [Simple Magic Guidelines](#simple-magic-guidelines).
Scrolls generally grant a flat +4 bonus if they require a specific
Approach and Archetype combination be used while casting, or a +2 bonus
if they only require a Archetype and can be used with any Approach.

However, and this is important, preparing a Scroll for use takes an
action. Thus to cast a spell from a Scroll requires an action to get it
out and prepare to use it, and an action to use it. Thus the large bonus
is factored against the loss of action economy.

A character can declare that they are preparing a Scroll before a
conflict starts if they had reason to believe that it would be
adviseable to do so and had time to prepare in the scene leading up to
the conflict. This indicates that the Scroll is out and opened (or on
display) and the character is poised to cast from it.

:::description
###### Scroll Of Slow

**Aspects**

-   Magical Spell Trapped On Paper
-   Faintly Magical (Transmutation)

**Benefit**

-   +2 to cast Slow.

**Uses**

-   \[1\]\
    Each usage box indicates a seperate use or application and each use
    expends a usage box; when there are none left the item is expended.

This item requires Arcane +1 or better to use.

:::description
###### Slow

**Aspects**

-   Arcane Spell (Transmutation)
-   Debuff

Create advantage while Arcane vs an Average (+1) difficulty on a target
that I can detect within two (2) zones. If I am successful I attach the
spell Aspect **Soooooo Sloooooow!** to the target. While this Aspect is
active the target can move one (1) fewer zones per exchange and cannot
move a zone and attack.

Overcoming Spell Aspects is explained in the [Simple Magic
guidelines](#simple-magic-guidelines).
:::
:::

However, as an option, a character that wants to be able to make their
own Scrolls and reliably have some available to them can do so by taking
a Stunt. The following example Stunt is for Arcane characters, but
Divine and Primal characters could take a similar Stunt by replacing
\"Arcane\" with \"Divine\" or \"Primal\".

:::description 
**Scroll Scrivener**: Because I have mastered the art of scribing
scrolls, I can be Cleverly Arcane and prepare \'spell completion\' items
as scrolls or similar items for specific spell effects that I can cast.
I can later cast the inscribed spell (using the [simple magic
guidelines]) from the item, gaining a bonus in the process. Other
characters with Arcane +1 or better can also use my scrolls. I can also
stockpile unused scrolls, as well as use scrolls inscribed by others.
Unless explicitly denied means and opportunity, I can prepare a number
of new scrolls ready for use equal to my Arcane capability each day.

NOTE: A character with this Stunt that wants to make a Scroll with two
or more uses can make multiple copies of that Scroll and just annotate
it as being one item with multiple uses at their discretion. Of course,
expendable magic items have a Stress track and can thus be targetted and
destroyed. Therefore it might be more pragmatic to keep each usage of a
Scroll separate to avoid putting all of one\'s eggs in the same basket.
:::

## Prepared Casting

A common trope of the source material is the so-called \"Vancian\" magic
concept, wherein some kinds of spellcasters must \"prepare\" or
\"memorize\" spells chosen from their list of \"known spells\" and / or
a \"spellbook\" ahead of time, and have a limited number of slots
determined by their \"caster level\" and rated in \"spell levels\".

It\'s all a bit cumbersome, adds a lot of bookkeeping and extra
verbiage, and also forces that type of character to guess what spells
they\'ll need through the course of the day and then puts pressure on
them to hoard their memorized spells like a miser. But, it does have the
benefit of long familiarity, and some people enjoy the extra mental
challenge and tension it instills.

Pathfinder Fate Accelerated allows free-casting without spell per day or
even hard spell level limits. This is a fast and loose style of play,
and it\'s weighted so as to keep spellcasters roughly equivalent in
potency to non-spellcasters. However, if the GM and group want to
include prepared casting semantics into their game, it can be \"turned\"
on for a given character at the cost of a Stunt.

:::tip
As Prepared Casting is handled as a Stunt and Fate Accelerated
characters are allowed to swap Stunts at milestones, it is technically
possible for strange shenanigans to come up. However, it is recommended
that Prepared Casting Stunts be anchored by a character\'s High Concept,
and can thus only be taken or removed when an appropriate High Concept
is taken or changed. This equates to character creation and major
milestones, and avoids casual fluctuations.
:::

### Arcane Prepared Caster

The below Stunt is appropriate for Arcane characters such as wizards,
who must have Arcane +2 or better to qualify for it. Note that this
allows a character with less than Arcane +3 to cast more than cantrips;
the low number of uses and lack of free-casting compensates.

:::description
**Prepared Caster (Arcane)**:

Because of my studies as a classically trained arcanist, each morning I
may \'prepare\' a number of \'spells\' equal to **((Careful + Clever) \*
Arcane)**.

To prepare a spell I roll 4dF against a Mediocre (+0) difficulty, adding
a preparation bonus equal to double my Arcane bonus.

I temporarily gain a new personal Aspect corresponding to the spell I
prepared with **one invoke, and annotated with the margin of success**.

Later during the day I may \'cast\' a prepared spell by invoking its
Aspect as an action and resolving the spell using the previously rolled
margin of success.

*Using Spell Write-ups*

If I am preparing a spell from a write-up that indicates an Approach be
combined with Arcane to cast the spell, with language such as \'while
Cleverly Arcane\', I ignore the requirement and use my prepared bonus
instead.

If I am preparing a spell from a write-up that states a particular
difficulty level, with language such as \'vs a Good (+3) difficulty)\',
the previously rolled margin of success is applied against the stated
difficulty when I \'cast\' it; any remaining shifts can be allocated per
the [Simple Magic Guidelines](#simple-magic-guidelines).
:::

### Divine Prepared Caster

The below Stunt is appropriate for Divine characters such as clerics,
who must have Divine +2 or better to qualify for it. Note that this
allows a character with less than Divine +3 to cast more than cantrips;
the low number of uses and lack of free-casting compensates.

:::description
**Prepared Caster (Divine)**:

Because of my devotion to my patron deity, each morning I may
\'prepare\' a number of \'prayers\' equal to **((Careful + Flashy) \*
Divine)**.

To prepare a prayer I roll 4dF against a Mediocre (+0) difficulty,
adding a preparation bonus equal to double my Divine bonus.

I temporarily gain a new personal Aspect corresponding to the prayer I
prepared with **one invoke, and annotated with the margin of success**.

Later during the day I may \'cast\' a prepared prayer by invoking its
Aspect as an action and resolving the prayer using the previously rolled
margin of success.

It is possible for a prayer resolution to fail if the margin of success
is insufficient to the difficulty or if I am opposed successfully. I can
spend a Fate point at this time to add +2 shifts to the margin of
success.

Unfortunately due to my focus on prepared casting, I cannot free cast
anything other than simple divine effects known as orisons.

*Using Spell Write-ups*

If I am preparing a prayer from a write-up that indicates an Approach be
combined with Divine to cast the prayer, with language such as \'while
Flashily Divine\', I ignore the requirement and use my prepared bonus
instead.

If I am preparing a prayer from a write-up that states a particular
difficulty level, with language such as \'vs a Good (+3) difficulty)\',
the previously rolled margin of success is applied against the stated
difficulty when I \'cast\' it; any remaining shifts can be allocated per
the [Simple Magic Guidelines](#simple-magic-guidelines).
:::

### Primal Prepared Caster

The below Stunt is appropriate for Primal characters such as druids, who
must have Primal +2 or better to qualify for it. Note that this allows a
character with less than Primal +3 to cast more than cantrips; the low
number of uses and lack of free-casting compensates.

:::description
**Prepared Caster (Primal)**: Because of my devotion to primordial
nature, each morning I may \'prepare\' a number of \'rites\' equal to
**((Careful + Sneaky) \* Primal)**.

To prepare a rite I roll 4dF against a Mediocre (+0) difficulty, adding
a preparation bonus equal to double my Primal bonus.

I temporarily gain a new personal Aspect corresponding to the rite I
prepared with **one invoke, and annotated with the margin of success**.

Later during the day I may \'cast\' a prepared rite by invoking its
Aspect as an action and resolving the rite using the previously rolled
margin of success.

It is possible for a rite resolution to fail if the margin of success is
insufficient to the difficulty or if I am opposed successfully. I can
spend a Fate point at this time to add +2 shifts to the margin of
success.

Unfortunately due to my focus on prepared casting, I cannot free cast
anything other than simple primal effects known as favors.

*Using Spell Write-ups*

If I am preparing a rite from a write-up that indicates an Approach be
combined with Primal to cast the rite, with language such as \'while
Sneakily Primal\', I ignore the requirement and use my prepared bonus
instead.

If I am preparing a rite from a write-up that states a particular
difficulty level, with language such as \'vs a Good (+3) difficulty)\',
the previously rolled margin of success is applied against the stated
difficulty when I \'cast\' it; any remaining shifts can be allocated per
the [Simple Magic Guidelines](#simple-magic-guidelines).
:::

### Known Spells List

As a rule of thumb prepared casters start play knowing about twice as
many spells as they can cast per day. Thus a prepared caster than can
prepare twelve (12) spells per day would start play knowing around
twentyfour (24) spells, give or take a couple. However to avoid forcing
a player to go through the chore of picking them all up front, which is
a bar to starting play, with the GM\'s permission a player can just
select enough spells to start the game and retroactively add more to the
list of known spells as they are thought up until they hit their limit.

Finally, prepared casters can learn more spells after play starts as
they encounter scrolls and spellbooks. How long it takes, whether a roll
is involved, hand-waved or played out\...Pathfinder Fate Accelerated
prefers to focus on narrative driven play and doesn\'t take a stance on
bookkeeping minutia where it can be avoided. Therefore it is assumed to
take some \"off screen\" time to learn new spells by default, but the
entire matter is left to the GM\'s discretion.

Some [sample spells](#sample-spells) are available, and players are also
free to come up with their own per GM\'s discretion.

### Pros and Cons of Prepared Casting

There are some interesting permutations to the choice to play a prepared
caster. Prepared casters:

-   Get a large bonus on their roll to prepare.
-   Can apply spells that they are pretty sure are going to work to a
    situation, because they already know how many shifts are available
    to the spell rather than having to hope they succeed at a 4dF roll
    at the time of casting.
-   Don\'t have to use create advantage actions when the \"heat is on\"
    to set up more esoteric spells, offering better action economy.
-   Get potentially far fewer spells per day than characters using the
    free-casting model, but as the saying goes \"enough is as good as a
    feast\". Eventually a prepared caster can cast a sufficient number
    of spells to get through a typical session of play.
-   Excel if sessions are short as their limited number of spells is
    mitigated.
-   Lag if sessions are longer with multiple encounters.
-   Lag if the player guesses wrong about what will be useful, or runs
    out of spells too soon, or hoards their spells so tightly they end
    up not doing anything.

::: {.Example}
**Prepared Casting Example**

[Amarzedrin](http://www.killershrike.com/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Amarzedrin/Amarzedrin.aspx)
can prepare up to twelve (12) spells per day. Each time he prepares a
spell, he rolls 4dF and adds +8 (his Arcane bonus, doubled). One morning
he prepares Fireball (and eleven (11) other spells). For the Fireball
preparation he rolls ++-\[\] for a total of +9. Amarzedrin\'s player
writes down the personal Aspect \"Prepared Fireball (+9) \[ \]\" on a
scrap of paper.

Because it is useful to this example, it makes sense that later in the
day Amarzedrin is confronted by a couple of mobs of goblins (represented
as mooks), damn the luck.

Deciding to not waste time and risk injury, Amarzedrin invokes Prepared
Fireball. The Prepared Fireball Aspect is removed from play as it has
been expended, and the nine (9) shifts from his margin of success are
used to power a Fireball spell effect.

Amarzedrin splits his nine (9) shifts into a group of five (5) shifts
and a group of four (4) shifts and allocates each set of shifts as
stress to the two goblin mobs. The first group of goblins defends at +0
(they are not spellcasters, and have no relevant skill-like abilities)
and roll +\-\-- for a total of -2. Amarzedrin succeeds with style and
may take a boost at the cost of a shift; but for purposes of the example
he opts to just blow them up.

The second group of goblins is actually a goblin pyromancer and his
apprentice\...of course! They have a relevant Fire Magic skill-like
ability at +3, and roll +++- for a total of Superb (+5), and defend
successfully. Looks like Amarzedrin has a fight on his hands.
:::

## Alchemists

Alchemists make potions, elixirs, and similar **concoctions** and invest
magical effects into them.

Alchemical effects most often take the form of buffs (Potion of Giant\'s
Strength!) and utility effects (Potion of Invisibility!), but there is
no restriction to enforce that. If an effect can be made to make sense
narratively, it is fair game.

### Prepared Casting (Alchemy)

The ability to prepare spell-like effects in advance and use them later
is functionally almost identical to the [prepared
casting](#prepared-casting) model, save for the narrative difference of
the effect being in item form. A version of prepared casting that uses
alchemical items can be handled in much the same way, using a Stunt.

A character with Arcane +1 or better can take the following Stunt, thus
making themselves an Alchemist. However, they lose the ability to use
Arcane to cast spells directly. At the GM\'s discretion, this model
could be extended to Divine and / or Primal as well with suitable name
and \"chrome\" changes.

:::description
**Prepared Caster (Alchemy):**

Because of my studies as a classically trained Alchemist, given time and
opportunity I may \'prepare\' a number of potions, elixirs, salves and
similar \'concoctions\' equal to **((Careful + Clever + Focused) \*
Arcane)**.

Unused concoctions remain until they get activated or destroyed and can
be stockpiled. These Aspects are portable; I may give them to others and
they can be taken away from me.

Making a concoction requires time, materials, and either a lab or a
field kit; the specifics are left to the GM\'s discretion, but simple
potions might take minutes while very powerful potions might take one or
more hours.

If a strict economy is being enforced in the campaign, it usually costs
about half retail price to make a concoction; GM\'s discretion applies.

To prepare a concoction I roll 4dF and add (Focused + Arcane) against a
Mediocre (+0) difficulty; failure indicates a botched concoction and
that \'slot\' is wasted for the day. I temporarily gain a new personal
Aspect corresponding to the concoction I prepared with **one invoke, and
annotated with the margin of success**.

Prepared concoctions are activated by invoking its Aspect as an action
and resolving the effect of the concoction using the previously rolled
margin of success. It is possible for a concoction resolution to fail if
the margin of success is insufficient to the difficulty or if opposed
successfully. If I am the activator, I can spend a Fate point at this
time to add +2 shifts to the margin of success.

Unfortunately due to my focus on Alchemy, I cannot free cast spells.

This stunt requires Arcane +1 or better to use.

*Commodities*

Alchemical concoctions can be given, sold to, or stolen by others and
used by them. They are effectively a commodity.

However all of an alchemist\'s concoctions, including those under
another character\'s control, count against their preparation limit.

*Alchemical Item Write-ups*

A variety of write-ups for [sample alchemical items] and [sample
potions] are available. Each usage of these kinds of alchemical items
counts against an alchemist\'s preparation limit.

Note that the provided write-ups are just examples, and not a restricted
list of allowed effects; an alchemist can make any sort of alchemical
item the GM allows.
:::

:::tip
As Prepared Casting is handled as a Stunt and Fate Accelerated
characters are allowed to swap Stunts at milestones, it is technically
possible for strange shenanigans to come up. However, it is recommended
that Prepared Casting Stunts be anchored by a character\'s High Concept,
and can thus only be taken or removed when an appropriate High Concept
is taken or changed. This equates to character creation and major
milestones, and avoids casual fluctuations.
:::

### Alchemical Dabbling

A character that wants to be able to make and carry around some potions
(or similar spell completion items), but doesn\'t want to give up their
ability to cast spells still has options. The most direct is to simply
take advantage of the guidelines on [Action Proxies](#action-proxies),
to create \"items\" that are really action proxies. This is neat and
tidy and doesn\'t require any additional investment of character
resources.

#### Prepared Casting (Alchemy Dabbler)

A character that wants to use the prepared casting model Stunt without
giving up the ability to free cast spells can take a version of the
**Prepared Casting (Alchemy)** Stunt that offers a smaller prepared item
limit but without the free casting restriction.

A character with Arcane +1 or better can take the following Stunt, thus
making themselves an alchemist. At the GM\'s discretion, this model
could be extended to Divine and / or Primal as well with suitable name
and \"chrome\" changes.

:::description
**Prepared Caster (Alchemy Dabbler)**

Because I am a capable dabbler in the esoteric science of Alchemy, given
time and opportunity I may \'prepare\' a number of potions, elixirs,
salves and similar \'concoctions\' equal to **(Careful + Arcane)**.

Unused concoctions remain until they get activated or destroyed and can
be stockpiled. These Aspects are portable; I may give them to others and
they can be taken away from me.

Making a concoction requires time, materials, and either a lab or a
field kit; the specifics are left to the GM\'s discretion, but simple
potions might take minutes while very powerful potions might take one or
more hours.

If a strict economy is being enforced in the campaign, it usually costs
about half retail price to make a concoction; GM\'s discretion applies.

To prepare a concoction I roll 4dF and add Arcane against a Mediocre
(+0) difficulty; failure indicates a botched concoction and that
\'slot\' is wasted for the day. I temporarily gain a new personal Aspect
corresponding to the concoction I prepared with **one invoke, and
annotated with the margin of success**.

Prepared concoctions are activated by invoking its Aspect as an action
and resolving the effect of the concoction using the previously rolled
margin of success. It is possible for a concoction resolution to fail if
the margin of success is insufficient to the difficulty or if opposed
successfully. If I am the activator, I can spend a Fate point at this
time to add +2 shifts to the margin of success.

This stunt requires Arcane +1 or better to use.

*Commodities*

Alchemical concoctions can be given, sold to, or stolen by others and
used by them. They are effectively a commodity.

However all of an alchemist\'s concoctions, including those under
another character\'s control, count against their preparation limit.

*Alchemical Item Write-ups*

A variety of write-ups for [sample alchemical items] and [sample
potions] are available. Each usage of these kinds of alchemical items
counts against an alchemist\'s preparation limit.

Note that the provided write-ups are just examples, and not a restricted
list of allowed effects; an alchemist can make any sort of alchemical
item the GM allows.
:::

### Special Purpose Stunts

An ability that is thematically \"alchemical\" can be expressed as one
or more Stunts that define their own function.

Also, it may sometimes make sense to define such a Stunt in a way that
it instead interacts with a Archetype other than the character\'s
primary spell casting Archetype, thus expanding the breadth of the kind
of effects the character can use.

::: {.Example}
For instance, in addition to being a full blown alchemist
[Xarren](http://www.killershrike.com/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Xarren/Xarren.aspx)
has the **Theriaxis** Stunt that allows him to mix up magical
medications with powerful and direct curative properties, which is an
ability normally associated with Divine or Primal Archetypes.

:::description
**Theriaxis**: Because I am a dedicated scholar who has mastered highly
esoteric magical and medical lore, I am able to make and apply
ointments, salves, nostrums, and elixirs that can heal and repair just
about any form of illness, wound, infection, or impurity. While I am
Carefully Arcane and I have access to my alchemical supplies, I may
clear a Stress box or clear a Consequence by overcoming a difficulty
equal to the numerical value of the stress box or Consequence. If I fail
to overcome the difficulty of a Consequence I may not attempt to heal
that same Consequence again. I may use this ability on others as well as
myself if I am able to examine and treat them. I may use this ability
**(Focused + Arcane)** times per day. This stunt requires Arcane +1 or
better to use.
:::
:::

::: {.Example}
For instance, the witch
[Ruelga](http://www.killershrike.com/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Ruelga/Ruelga.aspx)
has the **Potions, Poultices, Poisons** Stunt which allow her to make
Arcane concoctions with magical properties normally associated with
Primal magics.

:::description
**Potions, Poultices, Poisons**: Because I know ancient lores from more
primitive times, I am able to brew potions, poultices, and poisons that
can harm and heal and work odd and subtle magics on those who imbide
them. I can be Cleverly Arcane and make substances that replicate
effects that are usually the province of Primal. At any given time I can
have a number of substances brewed up and ready for use equal to my
**Arcane + Primal** capability. This stunt requires Arcane +1 or better
to use.
:::
:::

### Bombs

Chucking \"bombs\" or grenade-like weapons can be an effective and
memorable way for an alchemist to make their presense felt when things
get ugly.

One way to approach alchemical bombs is to treat them as merely a way to
inflict stress on multiple targets.

It is also possible to define bombs that do other things, such as Sticky
Bombs, or bombs that disrupt specific kinds of opponents such as Holy
Water Vials.

:::description
**Acid Bombs**: Because of my alchemical studies I am able to create and
then later throw alchemical acid bombs. - When I am Quickly Focused I
gain +3 to attack a target within two (2) zones of me by throwing an
alchemical acid bomb at them. - If I am successful, the acid bomb
shatters, splashing its contents upon my target and inflicting damage as
stress normally, but if I succeed with style, I must reduce the stress
to get a boost and the boost is upgraded to the situational Aspect
**Acid Burn!** which is attached to the target. - This Aspect is
automatically invoked at the beginning of subsequent exchanges to
inflict two (2) stress to the target per invoke. This Aspect can be
removed by overcoming a Good (+3) difficulty. - For a given session I
can carry around and use a number of acid bombs equal to my **(Clever +
Arcane)**. Other people can use my acid bombs; they still count against
my per-session limit however. - This stunt requires Arcane +1 or better
to use.
:::

:::description
**Alchemical Bombs**: Because of my alchemical studies I am able to
create and then later throw alchemical bombs. - When I am Cleverly
Focused I gain +1 to throw a bomb into my zone or an adjacent zone,
generally against an Average (+1) difficulty. - If I am successful, my
bomb explodes and inflicts a number of shifts of damage equal to my
**(Careful + Arcane)** against every target in the zone without
splitting shifts between them. This is non-discriminatory, and often
causes collateral damage. - For a given session I can carry around and
use a number of alchemical bombs equal to my **(Clever + Arcane)**.
Other people can not catalyze my bombs, they are only usable by me. -
This stunt requires Arcane +1 or better to use.
:::

:::description
**Gas Bombs**: Because of my alchemical studies I am able to create and
then later throw alchemical gas bombs. - When I am Carefully Focused I
gain +3 to attack a target zone within two (2) zones of me by throwing
an alchemical gas bomb. - If I am successful the gas bomb shatters,
releasing toxic fumes and applying the situational Aspect **Toxic Gas!**
to the zone with two free invokes. - This Aspect is automatically
invoked now and at the beginning of subsequent exchanges to inflict two
(2) stress per invoke to every target within the affected zone that
needs to breathe. This Aspect can be removed by strong winds or focused
air by overcoming a Good (+3) difficulty. - For a given session I can
carry around and use a number of gas bombs equal to my **(Clever +
Arcane)**. Other people can use my gas bombs; they still count against
my per-session limit however. - This stunt requires Arcane +1 or better
to use.
:::

:::description
**Holy Water Vials**: Because I have learned a special alchemical
recipe, I am able to make a mildly magical mixture containing holy
water, garlic, powdered silver, and grave dust that causes harm to the
undead. These vials can be thrown, with the liquid splashing out upon
impact to inflict harm on an undead creature. - When I am Quickly
Focused I gain +4 to attack an undead target within one (1) zone of me.
- If I am successful, the holy water vial shatters, splashing its
contents upon my target and inflicting damage as stress normally, but
this damage **cannot be reduced** by any innate ability of the target
(other forms of protection such as a magic item or a spell do apply). -
For a given session I can carry around and use a number of holy water
vials equal to my **(Clever + Arcane)**. Other people can use my holy
water vials; they still count against my per-session limit however. -
This stunt requires Arcane +1 or better to use.
:::

:::description
**Sticky Bombs**: Because of my alchemical studies I am able to create
and then later throw alchemical sticky bombs. - When I am Quickly
Focused I gain +3 to create advantage against a target within two (2)
zones of me by throwing a sticky bomb at them. - If I am successful, the
sticky bomb shatters, splashing its sticky contents upon my target,
attaching the situational Aspect **Trapped By Sticky Goo!** to the
target with three (3) invokes. - While this Aspect is in play, the
target is rooted in their current zone and thus cannot move to another
zone. This Aspect can be removed by overcoming a Good (+4) difficulty,
but each failed attempt to overcome it expends an invoke. - This Aspect
can be removed by overcoming a Good (+4) difficulty. However when it is
expended or removed a second situational Aspect, **Sticky Goo
Residue!**, is attached to the target with four (4) invokes. The second
Aspect prevents the target from moving more than one (1) zone per
action, and they cannot both move and attack. The second Aspect can be
removed by overcoming a Superb (+6) difficulty, but each failed attempt
to overcome it expends an invoke. - Note that this ability can cause
flying targets to plummet to the ground if they use winged flight. - For
a given session I can carry around and use a number of sticky bombs
equal to my **(Clever + Arcane)**. Other people can use my sticky bombs;
they still count against my per-session limit however. - This stunt
requires Arcane +1 or better to use.
:::

### Mutagens

While they may also grant secondary benefits, the fundamental nature of
mutagen Stunts is to allow a character to temporarily move their
Approaches and / or Archetype bonuses around to a different disposition
suited to an alternate physical form.

This can range from \"hulking out\", to taking on the forms and natural
abilities of animals, or something more unusual.

As this kind of ability is unusually powerful and offers a tremendous
amount of flexibility to a single character, it is usually appropriate
for this sort of Stunt to cost a Fate point or have scene or session
limits. However, the higher the Refresh equivalency of a Stunt the less
restricted it needs to be.

Ultimately, GM\'s discretion applies heavily to this sort of ability.

:::description
**Mutagen (Bruteform)**: Because I have mastered strange transmogrifying
magics I can concoct substances that allow me to change my own physical
structure and capacity, becoming much larger and stronger but at the
cost of greatly diminished intellgence. - I may spend a Fate point to
temporarily move all of my Approach bonuses to Forceful (leaving all of
my other Approaches at +0), and to move all of my Archetype bonuses to
Focused (leaving all of my other Archetypes at +0). I also change my
Trouble to **\'Mutagenic Brute\'**. - This lasts for an entire scene
unless I spend another Fate point to change back to normal. - This stunt
requires Arcane +1 or better to use.
:::

:::description
**Mutagen (Beastshape; -2)**: Because I have mastered strange
transmogrifying magics I can concoct substances that allow me to change
my own physical structure and capacity, taking on the forms of animals.
- I may spend a Fate point to temporarily assume an animal form. My
trappings magically change with me and are unavailable until I return to
my normal form. - When I change forms I move all of my Approach bonuses
to a disposition relevant to the animal form I am assuming, and I move
all of my Archetype bonuses to Focused (leaving all of my other
Archetypes at +0). - This lasts for an entire scene unless I choose to
return to normal, which ends the effect. Additionally, I may spend
another Fate point to assume a different animal\'s form, and I do not
have to first change back to normal. - When I change forms I gain an
additional Aspect named for the animal form I have assumed which I can
invoke when my current animal form is relevant, and which can be
compelled whenever my animal form or lack of humanoid anatomy might
inconvenience me. - If the animal form I change into has natural weapons
I may use Focused in place of Combatives while in a physical conflict. -
If the animal form I change into has an unusual form of movement, such
as the flight of a bird, the running of a wolf, or the swimming of a
shark then I gain that mode of movement while I am in that form as well,
at the GM\'s discretion. - If the animal form I change into has an
unusual or extra keen sense, such as the low light vision of a cat, the
olfactory senses of a canine, or the echolocation of a bat then I gain
that sense while I am in that form as well, at the GM\'s discretion. -
This stunt requires Arcane +1 or better to use. :::
:::

:::description
**Mutagen (Elementalform, -2)**: Because I have mastered strange
transmogrifying magics I can concoct substances that allow me to change
my own physical structure and capacity. I may spend **two (2) Fate
points** to temporarily change into an Elemental. - When I activate this
effect I must choose Air, Earth, Fire, or Water. - For the duration of
the effect I use the Large Elemental write-up for the elemental type I
have chosen instead of my own character write-up. (See [sample mutagen
elemental forms](#sample-mutagen-elemental-forms) for example elemental
types.) - My transformation lasts for an entire scene but I may change
back to my normal form at any time, ending the effect. - My trappings
change with me and are inaccessible for the duration of the effect. -
This stunt requires Arcane +1 or better to use.
:::

## Elementalists

Elementalists channel the powers of the primal elements of Air, Earth,
Water, and Fire.

Using this option, a character with Primal +3 or better and Arcane +1 or
better may take any or all of the following Stunts:

:::description
**Aeromancer**: Because I have mastered the ancient magics of the
Element of Air, I may combine my Arcane and Primal Archetypes when I am
casting spells related to air, wind, lighting, weather, and so forth.
:::

:::description
**Geomancer**: Because I have mastered the ancient magics of the Element
of Earth, I may combine my Arcane and Primal Archetypes when I am
casting spells related to earth, rock, seismic vibrations, and so forth.
:::

:::description
**Pyromancer**: Because I have mastered the ancient magics of the
Element of Fire, I may combine my Arcane and Primal Archetypes when I am
casting spells related to fire, heat, combustion, and so forth.
:::

:::description
**Hydromancer**: Because I have mastered the ancient magics of the
Element of Water, I may combine my Arcane and Primal Archetypes when I
am casting spells related to water, precipitation, steam, mist, liquids,
and so forth.
:::

These Stunts also cover the summoning of \"Elementals\", such as Earth
Elementals, Fire Elementals, and so forth, using the [Conjuration And
Summoning](#conjuration-and-summoning) guidelines.

::: {.Example}
For instance,
[Camren](http://www.killershrike.com/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Camren/Camren.aspx)
is an Aeromancer.
:::

### Para-Elemental

A character that has two or more of these Stunts can also justify
\"para-elemental\" effects. Alternately, a GM might allow a character to
anchor their Elemental Stunt on a \"Para-elemental\" instead.

-   Ice / Cold: Air & Water
-   Ooze / Mud: Water & Earth
-   Magma / Lava: Earth & Fire
-   Smoke / Soot: Fire & Air

## Primurgy

Using this option, a character with Primal +3 or better and Divine +1 or
better may take either or both of the following Stunts:

:::description
**Valimancer / Theurge**: Because I have mastered the ancient magics of
the Primal Element of Positive Energy, the raw quintessence from which
all material things are formed, I may combine my Divine and Primal
Archetypes when I am casting spells related to radiance (pure energy),
healing, creation ex nihilo, directly opposing negative energy, and so
forth.
:::

:::description
**Voidmancer / Anatheurge**: Because I have mastered the ancient magics
of the Primal Element of Negative Energy, the void which eventually
claims all things, the null state that counterpoints existence, I may
combine my Divine and Primal Archetypes when I am casting spells related
to stagnation, entropy, undeath, enervation, life draining, directly
opposing positive energy, and so forth.
:::

::: {.Example}
For instance,
[Thuvor](http://www.killershrike.com/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Thuvor/Thuvor.aspx)
is a \"Demiurge\", a master of both Theurgy and Anatheurgy.
:::


# Stunt Options

The following options are offered to expand the use of Stunts with
Pathfinder Fate Accelerated. A group might use none, some, or all of the
offered options as they see fit.

:::tip
A collection of [sample stunts](#sample-stunts) is available for
reference and reuse.
:::

## General Assumptions

This section discusses some general assumptions taken by this material
in the interests of full disclosure and to provide a solid foundation
for those who are making up their own Stunts for use in a Pathfinder FAE
game.

### Holistic Over Stunt Parity

As a general rule of thumb, on individual characters Pathfinder Fate
Accelerated allows a player to make one Stunt slightly stronger if they
also opt to make one of their other Stunts slightly weaker, taking a
more holistic view of the character\'s composite abilities. If the GM
allows this, they need to be mindful of it when players swap Stunts
around at milestones.

### Combining Create Advantage and Overcome

As a general rule of thumb, Pathfinder Fate Accelerated allows the
combination of create advantage and overcome for purposes of defining
Stunts wherever it makes sense to do so.

### Extra Actions

As a general rule of thumb, with any of the Stunt templates that pin an
action (attack, defend, create advantage and overcome), a character can
take the same Stunt effect multiple times to apply the Stunt to more
actions. This can be annotated on the character sheet with the simple
shorthand of parenthetically listing the total Refresh equivalency.

Thus a Stunt that applied to 2 actions could be listed as **Stunt Name
(-2)**, while a Stunt that applied to 3 actions could be listed as
**Stunt Name (-3)**.

:::description
**Veteran Of Many Wars (-2)**: Because I have engaged in so much combat,
I gain +1 when I am Combative and attack or defend.
:::

:::description
**Bundle Of Bouncy Energy (-3)**: Because I am so energetic and
acrobatic, I gain +2 when I am Quickly Focused and attack, defend,
create advantage, or overcome when I flip and bounce around.
:::

## Standard Stunt Templates

For purposes of reference and comparison, the two default Stunt
templates in Fate Accelerated are provided here. These are effectively
the \"baseline\" for Stunts in Pathfinder Fate Accelerated, and
characters can freely take Stunts of this sort, while custom Stunts can
be contrasted against these templates to guage balance.

### Because I Am Awesome At\...

This pattern for this template is\...

:::template
Because I **\[describe some way that you are exceptional, have a cool
bit of gear, or are otherwise awesome\]**, I get a +2 while I am
**\[pick one: Carefully, Cleverly, Flashily, Forcefully, Quickly,
Sneakily\]** **\[pick one: Combative, Roguish, Focused, Arcane, Primal,
Divine\]** and **\[pick one: attack, defend, create advantage or
overcome\]** when **\[describe a circumstance\]**.
:::

*Examples*

:::description
**Skulker**: Because I am so good at escaping notice, I get +2 while I
am Sneakily Roguish and create advantage or overcome challenges to avoid
notice.
:::

:::description
**Weapon Master**: Because I am so skilled at fighting with **\[pick a
weapon\]**, I gain +2 while I am Cleverly Combative when attacking with
my weapon of choice.
:::

:::description
**Quick Strike**: Because I am fast and accurate, I get +3 when I am
Quickly Combative and attack an opponent that has not yet gone in this
exchange.
:::

:::description
**Arcane Bolts**: Because I have mastered the art of Arcane Bolts, I
gain +2 when I am Flashily Arcane and attack with ranged magic.
:::

:::description
**Careful Crossbowman**: Because I am skilled with a crossbow, I gain +2
when I am Carefully Roguish and attack with a crossbow.
:::

:::description
**Dungeoneer**: Because I am a seasoned adventurer and dungeoneer, I
gain +2 when I am Clever and create advantage or overcome when a item of
common adventurer gear that I have proves to be useful.
:::

### Once Per Session I may\...

This pattern for this template is\...

:::template
Because I **\[describe some way that you are exceptional, have a cool
bit of gear, or are otherwise awesome\]**, once per game session I can
**\[describe something cool you can do\]**.
:::

*Examples*

:::description
**Whirlwind Attack**: Because I am a potent warrior **once per session**
when I am Flashily Combative and attack with a suitable weapon, I may
affect all enemy targets in my zone without having to split my shifts
between them.
:::

:::description
**Sudden Slumber**: Because I have mastered a magical talent from olden
times, once per session I can put any number of nameless mooks who lack
consequence slots in my zone or an adjacent zone to sleep. I may affect
additional contiguous zones by spending a Fate point per additional
zone. To do this I must use Carefully Arcane to create the advantage
**Sleep Now My Pretties** against an Average (+1) difficulty. Those
affected will sleep artificially deeply, and resist being woken for the
remainder of the scene; someone trying to wake a victim must overcome a
difficulty equal to Average (+1) plus my margin of success.
:::

:::description
**Chained Lightning**: Because I am able to project a bolt of lighting
that jumps from target to target, once per session when I am Flashily
Arcane and attack I may affect all enemy targets in my zone without
having to split my shifts between them.
:::

:::description
**Abyssal Darkness**: Because I have fiendish lineage, once per session
as an action I have the ability to add the situational Aspect **Abyssal
Darkness** to my zone or an adjacent zone. When I activate this ability
I can choose to spread it to cover additional contiguous zones at the
cost of one (1) Fate point per additional zone. This effect provides
active Superb (+5) defense against notice attempts and targeted
abilites. This Aspect lasts for an entire scene, though it can be
overcome and removed by a character with Arcane, Divine, or Primal of +3
or higher opposed by a Legendary (+8) difficulty. I am unaffected by
this Aspect.
:::

:::description
**Trapsetter**: Because I am skilled at setting traps, as a non-action I
can spend a Fate point to create the situational Aspect **Trapped!** on
my zone or up to three (3) zones away with two (2) invokes. The Aspect
represents a trap I happened to have set up while no one was looking, or
a clever exploitation of the ambient scenery. My traps can take many
forms, limited only to things I can narratively justify. I can invoke
the Aspect to hinder someone in the affected zone or to help myself or
an ally acting against someone in the affected zone. The difficulty for
others to notice my trap before the first time it is invoked or to
overcome it is equal to my **(Clever + Sneaky + Primal)** traits if in a
wildlands area, otherwise it is equal to my **(Clever + Sneaky +
Roguish)** traits.
:::

:::description
**Resilience**: Because of my impressive resilience, once per session if
I would take a Consequence I may instead spend a Fate point.
:::

## Because I Am Extra Good\...

This Stunt template gives a flat +1 bonus for a specific combination of
an Approach **or** Archetype with an action.

:::template
Because I **\[describe some way that you are extra good at a specific
Archetype or Approach\]**, I get a +1 when I am **\[pick one: Carefully,
Cleverly, Flashily, Forcefully, Quickly, Sneakily, Combative, Roguish,
Focused, Arcane, Primal, Divine\]** and **\[pick one: attack, defend,
create advantage or overcome\]**.
:::

Narrative Variant:

:::template
Because I **\[describe some way that you are extra good at a specific
Archetype or Approach\]**, I get a +1 when I am **\[pick one: Carefully,
Cleverly, Flashily, Forcefully, Quickly, Sneakily, Combative, Roguish,
Focused, Arcane, Primal, Divine\]** and **\[describe a narrative
circumstance\]**.
:::

*Examples*

:::description
**Combat Veteran**: Because I have engaged in so much combat, I gain +1
when I am Combative and attack.
:::

:::description
**Bushwhacker**: Because I am great at setting up ambushes, I gain +1
when I Sneakily set up an ambush or create a related advantage.
:::

:::description
**Staves Are Just So Useful**: Because I have learned to put my staff to
good use, I gain +1 when I am Careful and narratively describe how my
staff helps me. This can be used to aid me in my spell casting as well
as to fend off pesky attackers, or whatever fits the story.
:::

:::description
**Heavy Armor Training**: Because I have trained to wear heavy armor
extensively, I gain +1 to Combatives to defend when I am heavily
armored.
:::

:::description
**Cloak Of Elvenkind**: Because I have a magical Cloak of Elvenkind, I
gain +1 when Sneaky to create advantage or overcome to avoid notice
while wearing it.
:::

## Archetype Switch

This Stunt template allows a character to use one of their Archetypes in
place of another Archetype.

:::template
Because I **\[describe some way that you are able to leverage a
Archetype to do something that is usually accomplished with a different
Archetype\]**, I may use **\[pick one: Combative, Roguish, Focused,
Arcane, Primal, Divine\]** instead of **\[pick a different one:
Combative, Roguish, Focused, Arcane, Primal, Divine\]** for **\[describe
the function of the other Archetype that you can accomplish\]** when I
**\[describe the circumstances where this Stunt applies\]**.
:::

*Examples*

:::description
**Heed Me!**: Because I have a magical knack that allows me to augment
my spoken voice with enchanting magics I may use Arcane for social
interactions if I can talk and my target can hear me. I am resisted by
Arcane when I do so. This is a form of mind-affecting magic. This stunt
requires Arcane +1 or better to use.
:::

:::description
**Arcane Aegis**: Because I have mastered protecting myself with magic,
I may use Arcane to defend against physical attacks without needing to
first create an advantage to invoke.
:::

:::description
**True Seeing**: Because my patron diety grants me awareness, my powers
of observation are divinely enhanced; I may use Divine instead of
Focused to notice or perceive things, and I can sense things that
require mystical awareness to detect.
:::

:::description
**Wilderness Warrior**: Because I am so adept at stalking prey and
hunting in the wilderness, I may use Primal instead of Combative to
attack when I am in the wilderness.
:::

:::description
**Urban Jungle**: Because I have mastered the art of fading away,
blending in, and avoiding notice even in urban areas among people, I can
use Primal instead of Roguish to create advantage and overcome when
attempting to avoid being noticed in civilized areas (Primal is already
usable for this in rural, wildland areas).
:::

:::description
**Town And Country Sneaker**: Because I am so good at lurking and being
stealthy, I can use Roguish instead of Primal to create advantage and
overcome when attempting to avoid being noticed in rural and wildland
areas (Roguish is already usable for this in civilized areas).
:::

:::description
**Duelist**: Because I am skilled at the art of using weapons such as
thinblades, foils, rapiers, epees, sabres, and stilettos (i.e,
\'dueling\' weapons), I am a surprisingly effective combatant when armed
appropriately. Though my fighting style remains agile and even acrobatic
at times, when armed with an appropriate weapon I can use Focused in
place of Combatives in armed physical conflicts.
:::

:::description
**Dirty Infighter**: Because I am skilled at dirty tricks fighting and
getting inside my opponents\' guard to strike at vulnerable areas, I am
a surprisingly effective combatant. Though my fighting style remains
unconventional and evasive, when armed with daggers, light one handed
melee weapons such as short swords, garrottes, saps, makeshift weapons,
and similar armaments I can use Roguish to directly engage opponents who
are using Combative in armed physical conflicts.
:::

## Bonus Archetype

This Stunt template allows a character to add one of their Archetypes to
a resolution when they are using a different Archetype.

:::template
Because I **\[describe some way that you are able to add a Archetype to
do something using different Archetype\]**, while I am being **\[pick
one: Combative, Roguish, Focused, Arcane, Primal, Divine\]** I may add
**\[pick one: Combative, Roguish, Focused, Arcane, Primal, Divine\]** as
a bonus to **\[pick one: attack, defend, create advantage or
overcome\]** when **\[describe a circumstance\]**.
:::

*Examples*

:::description
**Divine Favor**: Because I am favored by my patron deity, I may add my
Divine capability as a bonus to defend against physical attacks, unless
I have recently done something unworthy of my faith.
:::

:::description
**Smite**: Because I have been granted the ability to smite those who
stand against me by my patron deity, I gain +1 while Combative to strike
down a foe within my zone whose nature is anathemic to my patron deity;
further if my attack inflicts a consequence I gain an additional free
invoke on it.
:::

:::description
**Wilderness Runner**: Because I am so swift and able to run for hours,
I may add my Primal capability bonus when I am Focused while running in
wildlands.
:::

:::description
**Combative Intimidation**: Because I am heavily armed and obviously
skilled at inflicting harm, I may add my Combative capability to create
advantage or overcome when I attempt to intimidate or assert control
over a social situation if I am armed appropriately.
:::

## Upgrade A Boost

This Stunt template allows a character to upgrade a boost gained for
succeeding with style into a full Aspect or some other benefit.

:::template
Because I **\[describe why you are able to do this\]**, if I get a boost
when I am **\[describe the circumstance when this Stunt applies\]** I
may use it to create the situational Aspect **\[pick the name of the
situational Aspect\]** on **\[pick the target (i.e. myself, the scene,
the target)\]** with two (2) invokes.
:::

Narrative Variant:

:::template
Because I **\[describe why you are able to do this\]**, if I get a boost
when I am **\[describe the circumstance when this Stunt applies\]** I
may use it to **\[describe the effect\]**.
:::

*Examples*

:::description
**Defensive Posture**: Because I am trained in a defensive fighting
style, if I get a boost when I am Carefully Combative while attacking I
may use it to create the situational Aspect **Defensive Posture** on
myself with two (2) invokes.
:::

:::description
**Riposte**: Because even my defense is dangerous, whenever I am
Flashily Focused and defend with style against a physical melee attack
while wielding a dueling weapon I may use the boost to inflict a single
point of stress on my attacker, immediately, as a free action.
:::

:::description
**Passing Strike**: Because I have a fast-moving agile fighting style,
whenever I am Quickly Combative and attack, if I choose to reduce the
damage I inflict to get a boost I may use that boost to immediately move
one (1) zone away, as a free action. If I also spend a Fate point I may
move an additional zone further away.
:::

## Powered By Fate!

This Stunt template allows a character to have an extra-powerful effect
that requires a Fate point to activate or use.

As a variant, take one of the other Stunt templates and amp up the
effect at the cost of a Fate point.

:::template
Because I **\[describe why you are able to do this\]**, I can spend a
Fate point to **\[describe the effect\]**.
:::

*Examples*

:::description
**Windrider**: Because I have mastered the art of riding the winds, I
can spend a Fate point to fly for the duration of a scene and
potentially longer. While flying I may move 1 additional zone per
exchange and I ignore any ground based obstacles I can fly over.
However, while I am flying in this fashion I must move at least 1 zone
each exchange and I can\'t go backwards. If I can\'t move forward (in
approx a 120 degree arc) I must land, ending the effect.
:::

:::description
**Reverberation**: Because I know many Words of Power, if I am currently
able to speak as a non-action I may spend a Fate point to utter a Word
and immediately remove from play any one situational Aspect in my zone
or an adjacent zone with a difficulty of Legendary (+8) or less to
overcome. Though there is no 4dF roll involved, I am considered to be
acting in a Flashily Arcane manner when I do this and the reverberations
of the Word are very noticeable.
:::

:::description
**Disrupt Undead**: When I am Forcefully Arcane and attack I may spend a
Fate point to target all Undead in my zone and all adjacent zones
without having to split my shifts between them.
:::

## Companions, Constructs, and Special Items

A Fate Accelerated character can use a Stunt to \"unlock\" a mininion or
secondary character profile. There are many different permutations of
this, but the three most common scenarios are to have a persistent
companion who travels with the character, or some kind of construct that
can be temporarily brought into a scene, or special items that are more
complicated than usual and call for a little extra grit to define.

### Companions

This Stunt template allows a character to have a companion, represented
by a mook or minor NPC template. The player controls the companion
generally, but the character can be compelled against using the
companion\'s Aspects. Simple mook template companions cost a single
Stunt slot, but multiple distinct companions cost additional Stunt
slots.

More capable and durable companions with Consequences, or minor NPCs
with Approaches, Archetypes, and Stunts can also be taken, but cost 2 or
more Stunt slots as determined by the GM.

A lenient GM might allow a particular companion an extra +1 in their
\"Good At\" set matched by an extra -1 in their \"Bad At\" set, or an
extra stress box if some other part of the companion is trailing behind
the power curve a bit with an eye towards the companion\'s overall
potency, but any improvements beyond that should be reflected by an
additional Stunt slot being allocated to the companion.

If a companion gets killed or removed from play for some reason, a
character can swap out the Stunt at a milestone. A character can also
swap the Stunt for an effectively *identical* Stunt and thus get a
replacement companion with similar abilities, with some narrative
support to explain it away. A companion Stunt that takes multiple Stunt
slots takes 1 milestone per slot to replace in this fashion.

:::description
**Minion**: Because **\[describe the reason you have a follower\]**, I
have drawn an assistant into my service.

:::description
###### Minion

**Aspects**

-   Select two.

**Good At**

-   Spread +4 around 1 to 4 skill-like abilities

**Bad At**

-   Spread -4 around 1 to 4 skill-like abilities

**Hits**

-   \[1\]\[1\]
:::
:::

:::description
**Animal Companion (-3)**: Because **\[describe the reason you have an
animal companion\]**, I have attracted a powerful animal companion that
chooses to aid me.

:::description
###### Animal Companion

**Aspects**

-   Select two.

**Good At**

-   Spread +4 around 1 to 4 skill-like abilities

**Bad At**

-   Spread -4 around 1 to 4 skill-like abilities

**Stress**

-   \[1\]\[2\]\[3\]
-   Mild (2)
-   Moderate (4)
:::
:::

### Construct

A variant of this allows a character to create (summon, call, conjure,
whatever) a magical construct or similar effect that acts independently
from the character to do some specific thing.

At your option, a single Stunt equivalent construct can have 5 simple
stress like an extra tough Mook, or 2 stress boxes and a Mild
Consequence like a weaker minor NPC.

However, to counterbalance this extra toughness, a construct must be
limited in some significant way, such as being anchored in place, or
limited to a specific purpose or action. If you want to make a
\"construct\" that is more like a normal character, just treat it as a
companion instead.

Like all companions, constructs can be made better and more durable by
allocating more Stunt slots to them.

:::description
**Servitor**: Because I have a magical ability, **\[describe the
circumstance that allows you to do this\]**, while I am **\[pick
Approach + Archetype combination\]** I may attempt to overcome a Superb
(+5) difficulty to summon a **\[describe the thing you summon\]** in my
zone to serve a specific purpose. See the Servitor profile for details.

:::description
###### Servitor

**Aspects**

-   Select two.

**Good At**

-   Spread +4 around 1 to 4 skill-like abilities

**Bad At**

-   Spread -4 around 1 to 4 skill-like abilities

**Stress**

-   \[1\]\[2\]
-   Mild (2)

Serves for a specific narrow purpose.
:::
:::

:::description
**Entangler**: Because I have a magical ability, **\[describe the
circumstance that allows you to do this\]**, while I am **\[pick
Approach + Archetype combination\]** I may attempt to overcome a Great
(+4) difficulty to create a **\[describe your entangling effect\]** in
my zone or an adjacent zone that attempts to wrap itself around and
entangle all targets in the zone. See the Entangler profile for details.
I am immune to this effect.

:::description
###### Entangler

**Aspects**

-   Select two.

**Good At**

-   Entangling (+4)

**Bad At**

-   Everything Else (-4)

**Hits**

-   \[1\]\[1\]\[1\]\[1\]\[1\]

Anchored to zone.
:::
:::

### Special Item

Another variant of this allows a character to have a special item with
complex traits (something that would be an Extra in Fate Core, for
instance). In this variant, the \"Good At\" abilities of the item apply
as a bonus when the character uses the special item to do that thing,
and the \"Bad At\" abilities of the special item apply as a penalty
whenever relevant.

Instead of skill-like ability bonuses, a special item might have flat
Stunt-like abilities, with negotiation with the GM to arrive at a fair
tradeoff for such abilities.

Special items usually have a Mild Consequence and take stress like a
character. More powerful special items might have even more
Consequences, though this extra durability should be taken into account
when assessing the Refresh equivalence of the Stunt.

Characters wielding a special item can choose to push stress onto their
special item rather than take it themselves if it makes narrative sense,
and if the special item is taken out it is either removed from play for
at least a session or is broken and needs to be repaired or replaced as
makes sense to the narrative (unique special items would eventually
become usable again, while more generic special items can just be
\"replaced\").

:::description
**Magical Item**: Because I possess a **\[describe the item\]**, I am
able to use it to aid me in my adventures.

:::description
###### Magical Item

**Aspects**

-   Select two.

**Good At**

-   Spread +4 around 1 to 4 skill-like abilities

**Bad At**

-   Spread -4 around 1 to 4 skill-like abilities

**Stress**

-   \[1\]\[2\]
-   Mild (2)
:::
:::

## Magic Style Stunts

A number of specific Stunts are defined in the [Simple magic
options](#simple-magic-options) section to help model things like
Prepared casting, Alchemy, Elementalism, and so on.

## Custom Stunts

Players don\'t have to use a Stunt template to make their Stunts; they
are simply provided as a convenience. Though they require more
discussion and balancing, custom Stunts offer one of the very best ways
to differentiate a character and should be encouraged.

Some examples are provided, but really, Custom Stunts can take any form
that the GM and players are comfortable with.

#### Examples

:::description
**Better Lucky Than Good**: Because I am unusually lucky, whenever I
make a 4dF resolution roll and the result is \[0 0 0 0\] (all blanks) I
treat the outcome as if I had rolled + + + + (all pluses)
:::

:::description
**Aggressive Assault**: Because I am driven to extreme aggression, when
I am Forcefully Combative and attack I may add from one to four
additional Fate dice to my 4dF attack roll and choose the four best dice
as my result. However, until my next exchange whenever I defend I add
the same number of Fate dice to my defend rolls and choose the four
worst dice as my result.
:::

:::description
**Sublime Expertise (-2)**: Because I am extremely skilled and rarely
blunder, whenever I make a 4dF roll I treat any result of less than 0 as
-1.
:::

:::description
**Bottomless Satchel**: Because I have a magical Bottomless Satchel that
is much bigger on the inside than on the outside, I can carry a large
amount of supplies as long as each item can fit through the opening of
the bag (which is about half a meter across at full expansion). I can
Carefully overcome against a Fair (+2) difficulty to retrieve anything
I\'ve explicitly put into it; failure just means I have to keep rooting
around looking for the item with additional actions. With the GM\'s
permission I can also spend a Fate point to pull out a mundane item that
can fit through the opening of the satchel that I haven\'t explictly put
in but \'happen to have\'.
:::

:::description
**Globe Of Invulnerability**: Because I have mastered a potent magical
discipline, when I am Carefully Arcane I can **spend a Fate point** to
allow create an advantage to add the situational Aspect **Globe Of
Invulnerability** with two (2) invokes to myself for the remainder of
the scene (and perhaps longer). I can add more invokes to this Aspect by
being Carefully Arcane and creating an advantage against a difficulty of
Great (+4). While this Aspect is available I can invoke it to use
Carefully Arcane to defend against any kind of attack affecting me or
the area immediately around me (including any allies). This Aspect can
be overcome and removed by a character with Arcane, Divine, or Primal of
+4 or higher opposed by a Legendary (+8) difficulty. This stunt requires
Arcane +4 or better to use.
:::

:::description
**Born Of Flame and Darkness**: Because I have fiendish lineage, when I
am Flashily Focused I am able to project searing flames from my body as
an attack at targets within my zone or in an adjacent zone; these
attacks are considered to be Arcane. Additionally I can justify create
advantage, overcome, and defend actions when fire, heat, darkness, or
demons are involved.
:::

:::description
**Fueled By Suffering**: Because I channel my pain and suffering and
become more dangerous when I am in danger, when I take stress or
consequences from attacks I gain a Boost called **Fueled By Suffering**.
:::

:::description
**Sudden Attack**: Because I am prone to sudden violence, I get +2 when
I Forcefully attack an opponent who is unaware of my intent.
:::

:::description
**Damage Reduction**: Because I am more durable than normal, I reduce by
one (1) all stress inflicted on me by physical and magical attacks.
:::

:::description
**Primal Reduction**: Because I am significantly more rugged, robust,
and survivable due to my deep connection with primal forces, I reduce by
one (1) all physical stress inflicted on me, and I reduce by two (2) all
environmental stress inflicted on me.
:::

:::description
**Extra Damaging**: Because I am **\[describe why you can cause more
damage than normal\]**, when I succesfully attack while **\[describe a
specific circumstance where this Stunt applies\]** I inflict +2 shifts
of extra damage.
:::


# Starting Power Level Options

This section provides options to help a GM decide how powerful they want
starting characters to be for a given Pathfinder Fate Accelerated
campaign.

Pathfinder Fate Accelerated assumes that starting characters are created
using the [Character Creation](#character-creation) guidelines.

The starting character with \[3\] Refresh, \[+2, +1, +1\] in Approaches,
a total of \[+4\] in Archetypes, and \[3\] free Stunt slots described
therein is considered to be a \"baseline\" character; all of the full
character write-ups provided in this material measure how many
advancements they have above or below that baseline.

However, kicking off a given Pathfinder Fate Accelerated campaign with
starting characters that are more or less powerful than the guidelines
assume is not a problem. The following options are provided to assist
with this.

## Simulating High Level Characters

Starting characters are assumed to be roughly equivalent to 5th-6th
level Pathfinder characters. However, it is easy enough to simulate
higher leveled Pathfinder characters by the simple expedient of adding
advancements.

### Approximated Advancement Chart

The below chart provides an approximated advancement progression.

It is important to keep in mind that this **is not** a \"level up\"
table, nor is it intended to dictate to GM\'s how fast or slow they
progress characters in their campaigns. GM\'s are free to use it as such
if they want to, but it is not intended to measure the progress of
player characters that are adventuring and advancing via actual play.

The chart is only offered as an aid for making new characters that start
out more powerful than the default assumptions.

To start a campaign off with more powerful characters, the GM should
just pick a level of play such as \"Epic\" or \"Wondrous\" and then
consult the corresponding row in the chart for the total Archetype and
Approach bonuses, Stunt slots, Aspects, and Refresh base for that power
level.

Players then use that information as their guide when making their
characters.

| Total Archetype Bonuses | Fate Ladder Label | Total Base Refresh | Free Stunt Slots | Allowed Aspect Slots | Total Approach Bonus | Total Advances | Notes            |
|-------------------------|-------------------|--------------------|------------------|----------------------|----------------------|----------------|------------------|
| +12                     | Otherworldly      | 11                 | 4                | 5                    | +20                  | +33            |                  |
| +11                     | Mythic            | 10                 | 4                | 5                    | +18                  | +29            |                  |
| +10                     | Wondrous          | 9                  | 4                | 5                    | +16                  | +25            | D&D "20th Level" |
| +9                      | Astonishing       | 8                  | 3                | 4                    | +14                  | +20            |                  |
| +8                      | Legendary         | 7                  | 3                | 4                    | +12                  | +16            |                  |
| +7                      | Epic              | 6                  | 3                | 4                    | +10                  | +12            |                  |
| +6                      | Fantastic         | 5                  | 3                | 4                    | +8                   | +8             | D&D "10th Level" |
| +5                      | Superb            | 4                  | 3                | 3                    | +6                   | +4             |                  |
| +4                      | Great             | 3                  | 3                | 3                    | +4                   | +0             | Starting FAE     |
| +3                      | Good              | 2                  | 2                | 3                    | +3                   | -4             |                  |
| +2                      | Fair              | 1                  | 1                | 2                    | +2                   | -8             | D&D "1st Level"  |
| +1                      | Average           | 0                  | 0                | 2                    | +1                   | -12            |                  |
| +0                      | Mediocre          | 0                  | 0                | 2                    | +0                   | -14            |                  |

:::sidebar
#### Fate Ladder Label

As a reference aid, the advancement chart equates a character\'s total
Archetype bonuses (shown in the left most column) with the corresponding
label from the Fate Ladder.

Thus if you took a character like [this version of
Dwyth](http://www.killershrike.com/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Dwyth/Epic/Dwyth.aspx)
and added up all of their Archetype bonuses to get a +7, you see that
you have an \"Epic\" character on your hands, while [this version of
Eleo](http://www.killershrike.com/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Eleo/Mythic/Eleo.aspx)
has Archetypes that add up to +11, and can thus be said to be a
\"Mythic\" character.

GM\'s that find no value in such labeling are free to ignore it.
:::

### Extra Stunt At Higher Rungs

Careful reading of the chart will reveal that it grants an extra free
Stunt slot at the very highest rungs. This allows truly powerful
characters to pick up a signature ability at the apex of their
progression a little more easily.

The extra free slot is counted against the advancement total.

:::sidebar
#### Beware: Assumptions Have Been Made

Due to the nature of milestones, it isn\'t really possible to know how
many significant milestones a character will have before reaching a
major milestone during actual play; that is a function of the adventure
plotting and the GM\'s discretion. But as Refresh and Archetype bonuses
are tied to major milestones, this makes it difficult to predict with
any certainty exactly what a real character will look like as they
progress during actual play.

Thus for the sake of expedience the chart makes the assumption of two
significant milestones per major milestone. This is probably a
conservative estimate overall for most groups, but it provides an easy
rule of thumb and is good enough for purposes of starting characters off
at a higher power level.
:::

### Extra Aspects At Higher Rungs

The chart also allows for extra Aspect slots at higher rungs on the
ladder, but they are not included in the advancement total. It can be
helpful to have some space to fully describe truly powerful characters
more thoroughly rather than try to shoehorn it all into three Aspects.
They are offered as a convenience, and are not mandatory.

## Simulating \"1st Level\" Characters

Aside from where noted, it is assumed that the standard Fate Accelerated
guidelines on starting characters (3 Refresh, 3 Aspects, 3 Stunts,
Approaches and Archetypes as indicated) are in effect. Consequently,
starting Fate Accelerated characters are considerably more capable and
powerful than starting chracters in the source material (Pathfinder FAE
starting characters are roughly equivalent to 5th-6th level Pathfinder
characters).

This isn\'t a bad thing; Fate Accelerated starting characters are
supposed to be capable and bad ass. They can engage with more and bigger
adventures faster, and not \"waste\" early play sessions dealing with
minor things simply to \"level up\" to a state where more significant
things are possible.

However if a particular group wants to more closely mimic the \"level
progression\" of the source material and have starting characters be
more analogous to \"1st level characters\", consider the following
option.

\"1st level\" equivalent characters define one Stunt and one or two
Aspects when starting play, and fill in the rest over the course of play
or during milestones. Additionally, characters may have either one (1)
Approach at +2 or two (2) Approaches at +1 each, and they only have two
(2) points to allocate to their Archetypes instead of four (4) points.

For reference, the [Approximated Advancement
Chart](#approximated-advancement-chart) includes this rung of ability.

Using this option it takes a couple of major milestones to \"catch up\"
to a normal starting Pathfinder Fate Accelerated character, and more
closely mimics the extreme early ramping of character abilities in the
source material.


# Mook Options

Mooks are the minor, often nameless, opposition encountered in Fate
Accelerated. The main differences between a mook and a normal character
is that a mook has a simplified write-up, and can represent either an
individual or a \"mob\" that acts as a group.

:::tip
A broad selection of mook write-ups for antagonists are available in the
[Sample Bestiary](#sample-bestiary), while mook write-ups for
adventuring encounters and challenges such as traps appear in various
[Sample Adventures](#sample-adventures).
:::

Mooks aren\'t always people or monsters; inanimate objects and
situations such as complex traps or environmental considerations like
burning lava or a pit of acid can also be represented using a mook
write-up. This allows for a more detailed encounter than narrative or
aspects alone and is particularly appropriate in situations where stress
might be inflicted as part of an encounter with the object or situation.

Using the Fate Accelerated rules starting on page 38 of the rulebook,
very simple guidelines are given for mooks which can be summarized as
\"one or two aspects, a list of things they get +2 to do, another list
of things they get -2 to do, a stress track of 0-2 boxes, and no
consequences\". Mention is given to using more complex options from Fate
Core if desired, and that\'s mooks as written.

Pathfinder Fate Accelerated expands on mook write-ups considerably to
allow more variability, which offers more options when translating
source material from Pathfinder into Fate Accelerated terms.

## Baseline Mook

Pathfinder Fate Accelerated baseline mooks are essentially the same as
mooks as described in the Fate Accelerated rulebook. The main difference
is that they can be upgraded, and instead of having a list of things
that get a bonus or penalty, Pathfinder Fate Accelerated assigns a bonus
or a penalty to a specific skill-like ability or concept, which allows a
more finely grained allocation.

A baseline Mook gets two Aspects, uses a simple hit box track starting
at zero (0) hit boxes, has one (1) skill-like ability that they are good
at (+2) or two (2) skill-like abilities they are fair at (+1 each), and
are either bad at one (1) thing (-2) or poor at two (2) things (-1
each).

## Mook Autonomy and Initiative

Mooks act on their own, but unless they have a skill-like ability,
Aspect, or Stunt that suggests otherwise, they have initiative 0.

## Mook Threat and Summoning Difficulty

Pathfinder Fate Accelerated allows mooks to be upgraded, which increases
the threat a given mook poses. As a convenience, the total upgrade value
of a mook can be used as a comparative threat value. For instance, a
mook with upgrades that total to +3 can be referred to as a +3 threat.

As a baseline mook has no upgrades, a baseline mook is effectively a +0
threat.

Finally, as described in the [Conjuration And
Summoning](#conjuration-and-summoning) section, Pathfinder Fate
Accelerated allows mooks to be summoned when that makes sense to the
story; the difficulty to summon a given mook is equal to the mook\'s
threat level. For instance, an upgraded mook with upgrades totalling to
+8 threat also presents a Legendary (+8) challenge for a summoner to
overcome if attempting to summon that kind of mook.

:::description
###### Baseline Mook (+0)

**Summoning Difficulty**

-   +0

**Aspects**

-   2 Aspects

**Good At**

-   Spread +2 around 1 to 2 skill-like abilities

**Bad At**

-   Spread -2 around 1 to 2 skill-like abilities
:::

## Mook Upgrades

Mooks can be improved upon from the default baseline to make a more
difficult encounter.

The Mook Upgrades chart details available upgrades, and measures the
impact of the upgrades for purposes of measuring how much of a threat
the mook is, which also sets the difficulty for purposes of summoning
such a mook.

| Mook Upgrades                                        | Threat Adjustment   |
| ---------------------------------------------------- | ------------------- |
| Traits                                               |                     |
| Additional Aspect                                    | +.5 each            |
| Additional +1 \"Good At\" skill-like ability bonus   | +1 each             |
| -1 Refresh equivalent ability (such as a Stunt)      | +1 each             |
| Stress Mitigation                                    |                     |
| Hit Box                                              | +.5 each            |
| Stress Box (up to \[1\]\[2\]\[3\])                   | +1 each             |
| Mild Consequence                                     | +1                  |
| Moderate Consequence                                 | +2                  |
| Severe Consequence                                   | +3                  |
| Hindrances                                           |                     |
| Reducing \"Bad At\" penalty by -1                    | +1 each             |
| Additional -1 \"Bad At\" penalty                     | -1 each             |
| Special retrictions                                  | -var                |

#### Mook Stunts

A mook can have one or more Stunts or similar Refresh reducing
abilities. As mooks do not have Refresh, this is treated like any other
mook upgrade. Simple Stunts that just grant a bonus to do something
specific are already covered by the \"Good At\" feature of mooks; thus
this option is better used for more complicated abilities that do
something other than just grant bonuses.

#### Spellcasting Mook

A mook can be a spellcaster, but must have a relevant skill-like ability
at +3 or better. For instance, a goblin \"fire shaman\" might be \"Good
At: Fire Magic (+3)\".

#### Hit Boxes

By default, the baseline mook has zero (0) hit boxes; however it can be
upgraded to have more.

Unlike a Fate Accelerated mook who can only have up to two (2) stress
boxes, **there isn\'t an arbitrary cap on how many hit boxes a mook
might have**.

Unlike stress boxes hit boxes explicitly are for absorbing stress that
represents damage, each box always has a value of \"1\", and additional
damage inflicted rolls over to additional hit boxes.

Thus if a mook with five (5) hit boxes were struck by an attack that
inflicted three (3) stress, three (3) hit boxes would be marked off.

When a mook takes more stress from damage than they have hit boxes, the
mook is defeated. This might mean death, it might mean the mook runs
away or otherwise exits the scene.

In Fate Accelerated some causes of stress are not characterized as
damage; for instance social stress might take the form of loss of
influence or standing in an argument. It is left to GM\'s discretion on
a case by case basis to determine if a given mook loses hit boxes to a
source of stress or not, and to interpret the narrative effect or lack
thereof.

For instance, a crazed goblin mook might be unaffected by a hero\'s
clever repartee or the emotional angst of a tragic turn of events but
might treat an attack on their morale by an angry canine animal
companion as damage, because goblins are terrified by dogs in the
setting of Golarion and therefore might break and run when faced with
such a threat. As always in Fate games, what makes sense to the evolving
story is the correct line of play.

:::sidebar
#### Hit Boxes And Mobs

Hit boxes are very easy to use, particularly when used for \"mobs\",
i.e. groups of nameless minions that are meant to be defeated en masse.

When used in this way, it is typical for the number of members in the
mob to be factored over the number of hit boxes for purposes of
determining how many individuals are part of the mob.

For instance if a mob had ten (10) hit boxes and ten (10) members, each
hit box would be assumed to be equivalent to one (1) member and thus
losing three (3) hit boxes would be assumed to be equivalent to losing
three (3) members from the mob.

On the other hand if a mob had ten (10) hit boxes and five (5) members,
every two (2) hit boxes would be assumed to be equivalent to one (1)
member and thus losing three (3) hit boxes would be assumed to be
equivalent to losing one (1) member of the mob and injuring one (1)
additional member of the mob.

However there is no requirement to track a close correlation between hit
boxes and members in a mob if a given GM finds no value in the
proposition; it is merely a convention.

###### Versus Zone attacks

Mathematically, it often makes sense to treat the members of a mob as
individuals for purposes of absorbing damage from Zone attacks that do
not split their shifts between targets.
:::

#### Stress Boxes

A mook can have stress boxes instead of hit boxes if desired, but as the
upgrade chart indicates this is considered to be a more significant
upgrade as it makes a mook more durable than an equivalent number of hit
boxes. Each additional stress box increases the difficulty to summon the
mook by +1. The stress boxes follow the normal progression of
**\[1\]\[2\]\[3\]**, must be taken in order, and are capped at \[3\].

#### Consequences

In Pathfinder Fate Accelerated a mook that has a full stress track (
**\[1\]\[2\]\[3\]**) can have one or more consequences. Having
consequences obviously makes a mook more durable, and should be reserved
for more creditable threats such as mooks who are intended to have an
impact upon a scene or present a more significant encounter.

Generally (though not always) mooks that have one or more consequences
are treated as individuals and are more likely to be named.

#### Hindrances

Mooks can have additional \"Bad At\" penalties at the GM\'s discretion,
and typically used to help balance a mook out. It also lowers the threat
level and thus the summoning difficulty of a mook.

Mooks can also have various restrictions that are not defined as a
penalty. Many such things can be reflected in a mooks aspects, but a GM
looking for a little more mechanical grit can further describe the mook
and assess how much the restriction lowers the mook\'s threat at their
discretion.

As an example, if a mook happens to be immobile it would generally be
implicit to their nature, as reflected by one or more Aspects.

For instance, a lock written up as a mook is attached to something and
inanimate; there probably isn\'t any need to further define a
restriction on the lock\'s mobility, and the lack of mobility doesn\'t
really impact the challenge the lock\'s write-up represents, which is
getting to whatever is behind the lock.

But in other cases immobility may not be so intrinsic to a mook\'s
concept, and more importantly does reduce the challenge represented by
the mook; in such a case it may make sense to explicitly note the
restriction.

Morale is another area where a specific restriction might apply and is
often worth calling out explicitly. If there are circumstances under
which a mook will always run away or withdraw from a conflict or
otherwise concede without putting up much resistance, they are not
really as big of a challenge as their write-up suggests and adding a
restriction that recognizes this often makes sense.

#### Reducing Bad At Penalties

Mooks can reduce the default \"Bad At\" penalty the baseline begins with
as an upgrade. Each -1 removed also raises the threat level and thus the
summoning difficulty of a mook by +1.

#### Mob-dependent Upgrades

A mook write-up might be presented with a note describing additional
upgrades that are turned on only when the mook is treated as a mob of a
certain size.

For instance, Excited Goblins are pretty weak when encountered
individually, but the write-up says to *\"Treat up to ten (10) Excited
Goblins as a mob; add +1 hit box and +1 to attack for every two Excited
Goblins remaining\"*. Thus if a mob of Excited Goblins had six (6)
members, compared to the baseline write-up the mob would gain +3 hit
boxes and +3 when attacking. Losing a hit box would reduce the mob to
four (4) members and the mob would gain a +2 bonus when attacking
instead of a +3 bonus.

:::sidebar
#### Negative Aspects

As an alternative, one or more Aspects that are primarily negative,
which is to say mostly penalize or disadvantage a mook, may reasonably
be considered to be hindrances rather than upgrades. If doing this, care
should be taken to make sure the negative intentions of such Aspects are
clearly suggested or communicated.

##### Situational To A Summon

Hindrances particular to a given circumstance might also be added to an
existing write-up by the player of a spellcaster in an attempt to lower
the summoning difficulty of the mook to improve their character\'s odds
of success.

This is fine, as long as the hindrances are legitimately applied and not
just an attempt at min-maxing.
:::

*Examples*

:::description
###### Excited Goblins

**Summoning Difficulty**

-   +0

**Aspects**

-   Scatterbrained
-   Out Of Control

**Good At**

-   Undisciplined Attack (+2)

**Bad At**

-   Making Sense (-2)

Treat up to ten (10) Excited Goblins as a mob; add +1 hit box and +1 to
attack for every two Excited Goblins remaining
:::

:::description
###### Donkey Rat

**Summoning Difficulty**

-   +3

**Aspects**

-   Really Big Rat

**Good At**

-   Very Sharp Teeth (+2)
-   Eating Just About Anything (+2)

**Bad At**

-   No Thumbs (-2)

**Hits**

-   \[\[1\]\[1\]

Up to three (3) may form a mob. Add two (2) hit boxes per rat. +1 to
attack and defend for each additional rat remaining.
:::

:::description
###### Hellhound

**Summoning Difficulty**

-   +15

**Aspects**

-   Swift And Cunning Hunter
-   Always Alert
-   Flaming Fury
-   Outsider

**Good At**

-   Burning Things (+3)
-   Noticing Things (+1)
-   Tooth And Claw (+2)

**Bad At**

-   Resisting Cold (-4)

**Stress**

-   \[1\]\[2\]\[3\]
-   Mild (2)

**Stunts**

-   **Darkvision**: Because I have Darkvision I can see perfectly in
    total darkness.
-   **Relentless Tracker**: Because I am so good at tracking my prey, I
    get +2 when I create advantage or overcome challenges related to
    tracking things down in wilderness settings.
-   **Diabolic Durability**: Because my infernal nature makes me much
    more durable than normal, I reduce by two (2) all stress inflicted
    on me by physical attacks. However this does not work against magic,
    cold iron, or weapons blessed by a benign deity.
-   **Diabolic Immunity (-3)**: Because of my infernal nature, I am
    immune to electricity, fire, disease, and poison. However, positive
    energy inflicts two (2) extra shifts of stress against me.
-   **Breath Of Infernal Flame (-2)**: Because of my infernal nature
    twice per conflict I may breathe a cone of fire, gaining +2 to
    attack one or more targets in my zone and one adjacent zone. If I
    split my shifts between multiple targets each target suffers a -2
    penalty to defend against this attack.

Do not treat as a mob. Hellhounds fight together as a pack, but using
individual tactics to herd, flank, and outmaneuver prey.
:::

:::description
###### Filth Fever Is In The Air

**Asepects**

-   Contagion
-   Unseen Threat

**Good At**

-   Infection (+4)

When a character with open wounds (as indicated by consequences or
situational Aspects) is in this area, attack them each exchange using
Infection. Any mild consequence taken from this attack is called
**Exposed To Filth Fever**; any moderate consequence is called
**Infected With Filth Fever**; and any severe consequence is called
**Ravaged By Filth Fever**.

The contagion is anchored in a particular area. It can be dispersed by
strong wind or cleansing magics as a Great (+4) difficulty.
:::

:::description
###### Freezing Doom Trap

**Aspects**

-   Arcane (Evocation)
-   Cold
-   Zone

**Effect**

-   +8 to attack all in the zone with a burst of intensely freezing
    cold; any consequences inflicted have something to do with being
    frozen in place or encrusted with ice.

**Detect**

-   Arcane (Evocation)
-   **Detection**: Requires special senses to detect as a Great (+4)
    challenge
-   **Easier Detection**: Difficulty to detect is reduced by (-1) while
    being Arcane

**Disarm**

-   Arcane (Evocation)
-   **Disarm**: Difficulty to disarm is Fantastic (+6)
-   **Easier Disarm**: Difficulty to disarm is reduced by (-1) while
    being Arcane
:::


# Money Options

This section collects various options to help a GM decide how they want
to handle money in their Pathfinder Fate Accelerated campaign.

Pathfinder Fate Accelerated doesn\'t concern itself about the economy in
the game setting a GM is using, or defining \"starting funds\", or even
tracking money by default.

From a character definition perspective, wealth or a significant lack of
it should be reflected in a character\'s High Concept and / or Aspects,
and that is sufficient.

Unless the GM objects, gear can just be written out narratively as
trappings without worrying about associated monetary considerations.

A thing that occurs in the source material is that high level
adventurers often accumulate absurd levels of wealth, which then gets
funnelled into purchasing encroachingly more powerful magical items to
make them even more capable so that they can go out and accumulate even
more loot in an ascending cycle of power creep. It causes the rules to
feel it necessary as a matter of *game balance*  to detail precise
breakdowns on how much wealth is appropriate for characters of each
level. It causes the already lengthy process of stating up a high level
NPC to take even longer as appropriate magic items must be purchased,
closely following the wealth per level guidelines.

Thus as adventurers succeed (i.e. survive to reach higher character
levels), accumulation of wealth and \"getting enough\" to \"stay
competitive\" with the game\'s expectations actually *increases*  in
importance rather than decreases. And as characters accumulate more
magical loot, they eventually become more defined by what magic items
they carry than their own intrinsic qualities.

However, Pathfinder Fate Accelerated doesn\'t care about loot. It only
cares about interesting characters and telling a good collaborative
story with them. Thus, the only value tracking money or managing an
economy has by default is the extent to which such things help tell a
more interesting story, and as soon as such things are no longer helping
to drive the story they are just getting in the way.

Therefore, by default, Pathfinder Fate Accelerated doesn\'t do anything
fancy to track money. How much stuff player characters are currently
dragging around is assumed to be enslaved to the needs of the plot and
to be subject to change as the story evolves.

So, whether one character starts off wealthy and another starts off poor
is not really that big of a deal in the scheme of things. The rich
character can lose it all to a twist of plot, while the pauper character
might stumble into wealth if that\'s the way the narrative
develops\...it\'s all grist for the story mill. Ultimately, Pathfinder
Fate Accelerated is a narrative game, so \"whatever serves the story\"
is the primary focus.

But different GM\'s will vary on how best to serve the story, and some
GM\'s may worry about \"game balance\" and the desire to make \"better
gear\" \"cost more\". Thus, individual groups are free to handle it
however they like and the below options are offered up with commentary
on why a GM might choose one of them.

Note that this isn\'t intended to be comprehensive; it just hits the
most obvious options.

## Old School Loot Tracking

Many GM\'s might prefer to maintain an in-game economy with price lists
for goods and services, such as is done in D&D and many other games. In
such a model 10 gp is just 10 gp and characters simply keep a running
tally on their character sheet or a scrap of paper of their loot, old
school style. When more money is acquired the number is bumped up, when
it is spent the number is bumped down.

It should be fairly safe to assume that most gamers know how this works
and laborious details or an explanation of basic addition and
subtraction are not required here.

One of the pros of this approach is familiarity, and being able to use
existing price charts from the source material. It is concrete and easy
to reason about. It gives GM\'s a stick and carrot to motivate
characters with; being out of money is a powerful motivator for going
out to get more, and the promise of a big payoff is often sufficient to
\"hook\" characters lacking any other motivation into a particular
adventure. If the characters are kept poor, the concreteness of this
method can also contribute to an overall \"gritty\" tone, which can help
a GM tell a particular kind of story.

The main con of this approach is that it can be a giant pain in the rear
end, adding a tedious layer of bookkeeping both during play (tracking
the numbers) and in between sessions for the GM (keeping players honest
and character sheets up to date, detailing the contents of opponents\'
purses during adventure design).

Another con is that the concreteness of the economy and personal loot
and gear will generally bleed into other areas of a character, and as
Fate Accelerated characters are fairly abstract this is usually an
awkward and undesirable development. For instance if a character has a
Stunt defined as a \"magic sword\" that just grants a +1 to attack in a
game where old school money tracking is being used questions like how
much is the sword worth, can it be bought and sold, etc will naturally
creep up\...but really the \"magic sword\" is just supposed to be part
of the character\'s concept and not a commodity.

Lastly and perhaps most damningly, it can also bog the game down in
accumulation of loot to the detriment of story.

## Situational Aspects

Some groups may not want to deal in the tracking of filthy lucre and
prefer to lean on Fate\'s excellent Aspect model to deal with it. In
this method money is handled as situational Aspects with some number of
invokes on them (**Big Score! (2)**, **Beer Money (5)**, **Bag of small
loose gems (3)**). Such Aspects can be attached to characters, a scene
or a location, the adventuring party itself, or whatever makes sense.

The main pro to this method is it is nicely simple and abstract and
doesn\'t get in the way of the story; indeed Aspects help tell a story
and often rise directly from emergent play. Another pro is that it
encourages players to not get bogged down in numbers and loot
accumulation. It also simplifies encounter design for the GM as they
don\'t have to put on their accountant\'s visor and pull out the old
abacus to determine how much money is appropriate to be in every
lizardman\'s lair or dragon\'s horde.

The main con of this method is that due to its abstraction, basic
monetary transactions that would normally be mere addition and
subtraction require adjudication; for instance what is the conversion
rate when a player wants to \"break\" an invoke on their **My Share Of
The Dragon\'s Horde** situational Aspect into some number of invokes on
a **Basic Living Expenses** situational Aspect? Another con is that
tracking of situational Aspects is just another kind of bookkeeping;
less concrete than tracking individual coinage and thus less bothersome,
but bookkeeping nonetheless.

## Wealth Stress

The excellent [Fate System
Toolkit](http://www.evilhat.com/home/fate-system-toolkit/) describes a
means of handling wealth using a Wealth stress track, detailed on page
69.

This method is similar to using the Situational Aspect option; they have
similar levels of abstraction and the same basic pros and cons. However
this method grants characters with wealth-related Aspects extra stress
boxes on their Wealth stress track. Pathfinder Fate Accelerated doesn\'t
normally attach weight to Aspects in this way, and doing so incentivizes
players to take Aspects for metagame reasons rather than character
concept reasons. Whether this feature of a Wealth stress track is a pro
or a con is left to individual GM\'s to decide, and the basic mechanism
could still be used with a slight tweak of course.

## Narrative-based GM Fiat

A GM willing to adjudicate on the fly if characters have enough money or
resources to do something or not can go \"no-system\". The GM just makes
decisions based upon the context of what has occurred previously and
what is happening currently in the story. When the GM feels that the
characters have sufficient resources to do whatever they are attempting,
they allow success or success at a cost. When the GM feels that the
characters have insufficient resources or need to do something specific
to justify moving the story forward, they simply state that to be the
case and the story proceeds accordingly.

Using this method, the GM should be fair and indicate to the players
when their characters are running low on resources. Of course even lack
of resources can be turned into a positive thing by weaving it into the
emerging story, using it as a hook or a goad, even tying it into
consequences or compels on appropriate Aspects if lack of resources is
appropriate and relevant.

A pro of this approach is that it is purely based on character concept
and narrative. For GM\'s comfortable with this style, it is incredibly
empowering, and gives the GM yet one more tool to help develop the
emerging story. There\'s also no bookkeeping beyond any notes a
forgetful GM might want to jot down to jar their memory.

The main con of this approach is that many people, GM\'s and players
alike, are not comfortable with this level of \"hand wavium\"
abstraction. Some people want hard numbers and are frustrated by the
lack of them. Some GM\'s are not willing or able to make the many snap
decisions this sort of method requires, or to be consistent enough to
make it work.

## Hybrid Option: Scaled To Power Level

A GM might consider the power scale of their campaign and adjust how
they handle money and economy as the player characters advance. Funds or
lack of funds can be a powerful story element for starting adventurers,
and thus using a more gritty or exacting means of tracking resources can
help establish a particular feel for lower powered characters. But at a
certain point, powerful adventurers rise above all that and resources or
lack there of are no longer a compelling story element.

Put into context, do we need to know how many copper pieces **Fizzbane
The Apexmage, Archonix of the Fell Mountains, Spell-laird of the Far
Reaches, Pact-holder of Ten Thousand Demons** has in his belt pouch? Is
that really a matter of interest? Does it further the story? Is a scene
where such a character has to grope through his belt pouches to come up
with a few bits to buy an apple from a street vendor going to be a
thing? Maybe in a farse or satire, but typically not in a high level
adventuring campaign.

A GM might therefore start off using old school loot tracking or
situational aspects or a wealth track or some other structured method,
but at some point switch to a unstructured method such as narrative
GM-fiat when it no longer really matters to the story how much money
player characters have.


# Initiative Options

This section collects various options to help a GM decide how they want
to handle initiative in their Pathfinder Fate Accelerated campaign.

Initiative has become something of a hot topic in recent years, with
some gamers not caring and others having very strong preferences or
opinions on the matter. But either type of gamer can rest easy, as
Pathfinder FAE is agnostic to initiative. A given group can use whatever
initiative mechanism they want. However, a few options are specifically
called out below.

## Default Quickness

Just using the Fate Accelerated default option of basing initiative on
the Quick Approach can be used as is.

## Narrative Driven

In this option who goes in what order is determined by the events in
play in a given scene. In other words, what makes the most sense in the
current scene, or what provides the most drama. If it is unclear, the GM
decides who goes in what order. If an order is chosen but a player
really wants their character to go first, they can spend a Fate point to
do so.

A good rule of thumb for using this sort of initiative is to consider
how interesting or impactful it might be for a given character to go
next. Aspects are a good guide for this, as is emerging play. In the
case where two or more characters going next would be equivalently
interesting, have them go simultaneously and see if that makes things
even more interesting.

## Approach Driven

Using this option initiative is decided by which Approach a given
character wants to use for their action, following a progression.

When initiative starts to matter to the story the GM picks a relevant
Approach such as Quick and says something along the lines of \"Who is
acting quickly?\". Any characters or NPC\'s using Quick to resolve their
actions then go in bonus order; any ties are considered to occur
simultaneously. The GM then says \"Who is acting cleverly?\", and
repeats the process.

The following progression is given as a default as in a physical combat
the progression is assumed to start at Quick, but this could change
based upon the situation. In an ambush or stealthy scenario the
progression could be started at Sneaky, then flow to Careful, then to
Quick, and so on. In an academic encounter it might start at Clever.
Whatever makes sense in the situation.

:::template
**Quick -\> Clever -\> Forceful -\> Flashy -\> Sneaky -\> Careful**
:::

Using this method Mooks that lack a relevant skill-like ability or
Approach generally go last, unless the GM chooses to treat a particular
Mook as acting a certain way as fits the scene.

## Chart Driven

Using this option the GM maintains an initiative chart starting at 0 and
going up to 10 or higher. At the begining of each exchange in a
conflict, each player places a token representing their character on the
chart on the number equal to their Quickness plus any relevant Stunts.
The GM does the same for NPCs. A player can invoke a relevant Aspect to
gain a +2 bonus and move their token up accordingly.

The GM then starts counting down from the top of the chart.

When the first token is encountered, if it is a player character\'s
token that player may take their character\'s action, **or choose to
allow any other player character who has not yet gone in the exchange to
take their action**.

If a GM\'s token is encountered, the GM may take an action for any NPC
that has not yet gone in the exchange. If both a player character and a
GM token are encountered, the player character token is resolved first.

A player may choose to use their character\'s action for the turn to
create advantage against an Average (+1) difficulty to attach the
situational Aspect **Improved Initiative** on themselves. They may
use invokes on this Aspect in following exchanges to boost their
initiative in those exchanges.

## Baton Pass

Use a prop of some sort to indicate initiative; which we will refer to
as the baton.

When a scene starts, if a player character is driving the action or
initiating a conflict, that character\'s player gets the baton. If the
GM is springing an ambush or otherwise forcing a conflict on the player
characters the GM gets the baton.

In any given scene, whoever currently has the baton chooses a player
character that has not gone yet in the exchange to go next (they may
choose their own character), *or* allows the GM to take an action for a
GM controlled character.

If a player character is chosen to go next, the baton is passed to the
GM. If the GM is chosen to go next the GM passes the baton to a player
of their choice whose character has not gone yet.

At any time if a player whose character has not gone yet or the GM wants
the baton, they may pay a Fate point to the person who currently has the
baton to take it. Note that Fate points paid by players to take the
baton away from the GM go to the GM\'s pool of Fate points.


# Milestones & Advancement Options

This section collects various options to help a GM decide how they want
to handle milestones and advancement in their Pathfinder Fate
Accelerated campaign.

The default milestone based advancement described in Fate Accelerated
works wonderfully and allows characters to not just get better but also
to adapt to the unfolding story. Generally speaking, Pathfinder Fate
Accelerated assumes that it is being used as described below. However,
some GM\'s may prefer to do away with it entirely, or apply some
restrictions to it and some options to help with that are provided.

## Assumed Milestones and Advancement

Approaches cannot be raised above Superb (+5), as is normal for Fate
Accelerated. Archetypes on the other hand are not capped and can be
raised as high as a character is able to progress.

At **minor milestones**, Pathfinder Fate Accelerated doesn\'t change
anything; just use the rules as written in the Fate Accelerated
rulebook.

At **significant milestones**, again nothing is changed. You may raise
an Approach by +1, as normal. You may not raise a Archetype by +1.

At **major milestones** in addition to the various things you are
already allowed to do, in Pathfinder Fate Accelerated you may also raise
*either* an Approach *or* a Archetype by +1, your choice.

Unlike Approaches you generally cannot switch your Archetypes around
after play starts. A GM might allow you to take a +1 off of a Archetype
and put it on a different Archetype during a milestone if you can make a
strong enough case for it, but this should be an uncommon
occurrence\...perhaps in conjunction with a change of High Concept.

## Mind the Gap

:::tip
This option is only applicable to Approaches; it does not apply to
Capabilites.
:::

Using the standard advancement options described in the Fate Accelerated
rulebook is generally a safe proposition, but there is nothing by
default preventing a player for putting all of their Approach
advancements into one Approach (up to the cap of +5). Some GM\'s may
prefer to prevent characters from becoming imbalanced due to this sort
of overconcentration of bonuses onto a single Approach; this option
offers a fairly light handed way to do that.

Pathfinder FAE does not force a pyramid style of Approach advancement by
default, but to prevent completely unbalanced characters GM\'s might
consider enforcing some restrictions to prevent a player from putting
all of their +1\'s in a single Approach and then attempting to resolve
every challenge using that Approach.

For instance, Pathfinder FAE characters start with +2, +1, +1 in
Approaches of their choice. Often a player raises the +2 bonus to a +3
at the first significant milestone to reenforce the character\'s
specialty, and that\'s fine. But if the second significant milestone\'s
raise goes to advance +3 to +4, we end up with a rather awkward
character that has Approaches of +4, +1, +1; the third milestone often
further tilts the character to +5, +1, +1.

One strategy to address this sort of outcome is a modified skill pyramid
scheme referred to as **Mind the Gap**, which requires that +1 raises to
Approaches gained at milestones be allocated to fill in or close any
gaps between bonus numbers.

The following Approach distributions are provided as examples:

-   +2, +1, +1
    -   there is no gap; the character can advance any Approach by +1
-   +3, +1, +1
    -   the gap is between +1 and +3; the character needs a +2
-   +4, +3, +1
    -   the gap is between +1 and +3; the character needs a +2
-   +3, +2, +1
    -   there is no gap; the character can advance any Approach by +1
-   +3, +2, +2
    -   the gap is between +0 and +2; the character needs a +1 in a new
        Approach
-   +4, +3, +2, +1
    -   there is no gap; the character can advance any Approach by +1

This allows for some early ramping up but gradually puts the breaks on
as bonuses climb higher up the ladder.

The pattern extrapolates from there. The overall effect is, players can
still specialize their characters and get that early extra +1 on their
dominant Approach, but it prevents characters from getting competely
lopsided.

## Plot Driven Advancement

A GM might decide to ignore the milestone based advancement of Fate
Accelerated and instead simply allow characters to improve and change as
the plot demands. This might even happen mid-adventure.

The extent of improvements or changes is essentially a ruling by the GM
or a negotiation between the GM and the player on a case by case basis.
Maintaining \"balance\", keeping things fair, and all other social
contract considerations are left to the GM and their play group to sort
out, with no schedule or expectation put forth by the game system.

The main pro of this option is that it is completely fluid and
encourages full contact non-gamist narrative play. It can be
particularly advantageous for high-end reality bending campaigns where
the nature of a \"character\" is not necessarily static. In the context
of a D & D flavored game, it supports the style of play where the party
\"levels up\" at specific pre-determined times to \"keep them on track\"
for a long adventure arc.

The main con of this option is that it can be completely arbitrary and
has the potential to marginalize player agency if the GM isn\'t careful.
On the other hand if the GM is too permissive or powers up the
characters too much it can turn into a \"Monty Haul\" sort of campaign.
Another con is that some, perhaps even many, players enjoy looking
forward to an advancement progression and it helps fuel their continuing
enjoyment of playing their character; getting rid of a predictable
progression can erode their interest in continued play.


# Pathfinder Class Translations

The following sections provide suggestions for translating various
Pathfinder Classes into Pathfinder Fate Accelerated terms.

**[The Alchemist](#the-alchemist)**: these crafty chemists make a
bewildering array of alchemical concoctions and devices. The alchemist
captures their own magic potential within liquids and extracts they
create, infusing their chemicals with virulent power to grant impressive
skill with poisons, explosives, and all manner of self-transformative
magic.

**[The Barbarian](#the-barbarian):** these warmongers know little of
training, preparation, or the rules of warfare; for them, only the
moment exists, with the foes that stand before them and the knowledge
that the next moment might hold their death.

**[The Bard](#the-bard)**: masters of one or many forms of artistry,
bards possess an uncanny ability to know more than they should and use
what they learn to keep themselves and their allies ever one step ahead
of danger.

**[The Cavalier](#the-cavalier)**: the cavalier is a brave warrior sworn
to a code of honor, using wit, charm, and strength at arms to rally
their companions and achieve their goals.

**[The Cleric](#the-cleric)**: devoted to the tenets of the religions
and philosophies that inspire them, these ecclesiastics quest to spread
the knowledge and influence of their faith. Yet while they might share
similar abilities, clerics prove as different from one another as the
divinities they serve, with some offering healing and redemption, others
judging law and truth, and still others spreading conflict and
corruption.

**[The Druid](#the-druid)**: allies to beasts and manipulators of
nature, these often misunderstood protectors of the wild strive to
shield their lands from all who would threaten them and prove the might
of the wilds to those who lock themselves behind city walls. Rewarded
for their devotion with incredible powers, druids gain unparalleled
shape-shifting abilities, the companionship of mighty beasts, and the
power to call upon nature\'s wrath.

**[The Fighter](#the-fighter)**: lords of the battlefield, fighters are
a disparate lot, training with many weapons or just one, perfecting the
uses of armor, learning the fighting techniques of exotic masters, and
studying the art of combat. Soldiers, knights, hunters, and artists of
war, fighters are unparalleled champions, and woe to those who dare
stand against them.

**[The Inquisitor](#the-inquisitor)**: pragmatic servants of the gods,
inquisitors concern themselves with dealing with the things that clerics
and paladins don\'t care to sully their hands with. Worldly and canny,
inquisitors are adapatable; whether their mandate involves rooting out
heresy, or eliminating enemies of the faith, or weeding out things
counter to their religion\'s best interests, an inquisitor does what is
necessary.

**[The Magus](#the-magus)**: a student of both martial and mystical
disciplines, able to fight with blade and spell in tandem.

**[The Monk](#the-monk)**: from battle-minded ascetics to self-taught
brawlers, monks tread the path of discipline to elevate their bodies,
becoming weapons of war.

**[The Oracle](#the-oracle)**: these divine vessels are granted power
without their choice, selected by providence to wield powers that even
they do not fully understand. Unlike a cleric, who draws her magic
through devotion to a deity, oracles garner strength and power from many
sources.

**[The Paladin](#the-paladin)**: these holy champions are blessed with
boons to aid them in their quests: powers to banish evil, heal the
innocent, and inspire the faithful. Although their convictions might
lead them into conflict with the very souls they would save, paladins
weather endless challenges of faith and dark temptations, risking their
lives to do right and fighting to bring about a brighter future.

**[The Ranger](#the-ranger)**: knowledgeable, patient, and skilled
hunters, these rangers hound man, beast, and monster alike, gaining
insight into the way of the predator, skill in varied environments, and
ever more lethal martial prowess.

**[The Rogue](#the-rogue)**: thieves and gamblers, fast talkers and
diplomats, bandits and bounty hunters, and explorers and investigators
all might be considered rogues, as well as countless other professions
that rely upon wits, prowess, or luck.

**[The Sorcerer](#the-sorcerer)**: these magic-touched souls endlessly
indulge in and refine their mysterious abilities, gradually learning how
to harness their arcane birthright and coax forth ever greater power.

**[The Summoner](#the-summoner)**: bonded to a mysterious creature
called an eidolon, the summoner focuses his power on strengthening that
connection and enhancing his strange, otherworldy companion.

**[The Witch](#the-witch)**: practicing a darker and older form of magic
than wizards, more in tune with primeval forces. Witches, warlocks,
wisdoms, and wyrds, these practitioners of practical and insidious
dweomers are often maligned unfairly due to the heinous acts of a few,
and thus often hide themselves away in remote hermitages, or lurk around
the edges of society.

**[The Wizard](#the-wizard)**: these shrewd magic-users seek, collect,
and covet esoteric knowledge, drawing on cultic arts to work wonders
beyond the abilities of mere mortals. While some might choose a
particular field of magical study and become masters of such powers,
others embrace versatility, reveling in the unbounded wonders of all
magic.

## The Alchemist

This section provides suggestions and insights into how to translate the
ideas of the Alchemist class from the source material into Pathfinder
Fate Accelerated.

:::flavor
\"Whether secreted away in a smoky basement laboratory or gleefully
experimenting in a well-respected school of magic, the alchemist is
often regarded as being just as unstable, unpredictable, and dangerous
as the concoctions they brew.

While some creators of alchemical items content themselves with
sedentary lives as merchants, providing tindertwigs and smokesticks, the
true alchemist answers a deeper calling.

Rather than cast magic like a spellcaster, the alchemist captures their
own magic potential within liquids and extracts they create, infusing
their chemicals with virulent power to grant impressive skill with
poisons, explosives, and all manner of self-transformative magic.\"
:::

Alchemists tend to be roguish, and thus the advice given in the
[Rogue] class translation section is also relevant to many alchemists
and you might want to skim that section for general ideas. This section
concentrates on content of specific interest to alchemists.

Alchemists make potions, elixirs, and similar **concoctions** and invest
magical effects into them.

Alchemical effects most often take the form of buffs (Potion of Giant\'s
Strength!) and utility effects (Potion of Invisibility!), but there is
no restriction to enforce that. If an effect can be made to make sense
narratively, it is fair game.

Alchemy related abilities rely heavily on Stunts, and are covered in
categorical detail in the Stunt section.

:::sidebar
#### Sample Iconics

[Xarren](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Xarren/Xarren.aspx),
[Twilla](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Twilla/Twilla.aspx),
[Ruelga](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Ruelga/Ruelga.aspx),
[Olivin](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Olivin/Olivin.aspx)
:::

:::sidebar
#### Starting Archetype Sets

**Hermetic**: Arcane +4

**Apothecary**: Arcane +3, Primal +1

**Internal Alchemist**: Arcane +2, Focused +2

**Crafty Crafter**: Arcane +2, Roguish +2

**Sapper**: Combative +2, Arcane +1, Roguish +1

**Gadgeteer**: Roguish +3, Arcane +1
:::

:::sidebar
#### Stuntless Alchemy

A character with Arcane+3 that wants to be able to make and carry
around some potions (or similar spell completion items), but doesn\'t
want to allocate Stunt slots for such an ability has a neat and tidy
option available to them.

Such characters can use the concept of [action proxies](#action-proxies)
described in the Simple Magic Guidelines to create \"alchemical items\"
that are really action proxies.
:::

### Archetype Considerations

Alchemists have a lot of flexibility when it comes to Archetypes.

An alchemist will need at least **Arcane** +1 as most Alchemy related
Stunts require it. Also, some Stunts have a limited number of uses per
day or session based upon the alchemist\'s **Arcane** bonus.

**Roguish** is an excellent and very common choice for alchemists,
particularly those who function like gadgeteers or trapbusters.

**Roguish** allows an alchemist to present a generally skilled and
competent demeanor and also to serve as a \"face\" for an adventuring
group.

Also, alchemists tend to be well-educated free thinkers with active
minds and unbridled curiosity, which leads them to pick up all manner of
interesting knacks and knowledge.

**Focused** +1 or +2 works well for many alchemists, particularly those
with more of an \"internal alchemy\" slant.

**Combative** +1 or +2 is an option for alchemists who use their alchemy
to gain combat boosts, use their alchemy in an aggressive way that
brings them into close combat situation, or who turn their craft to the
art of the demolitionist and find work as a sapper or seige warfare
specialist.

**Primal** +1 is an option for alchemists who function as herbalists or
apothecaries. There\'s also nothing other than GM veto preventing a
player from taking Alchemy Stunts that are normally based on Arcane and
re-basing them on Primal.

**Divine** +1 is a somewhat unusual choice but could be made to work for
the follower of a god of medicine or invention. There\'s also nothing
other than GM veto preventing a player from taking Alchemy Stunts that
are normally based on Arcane and re-basing them on Divine.

#### Three Or Four Archetypes

Thanks to the low Archetype requirements of Alchemy, it is feasible for
an alchemist to spread themselves across three or four Archetypes, in
various dispositions. This allows a character to be very broad based,
though at the cost of being less specialized and thus less competitive
in specific niches compared to characters that stick to one or two
Archetypes.

### Approach Considerations

All Approaches are equally viable for Alchemists, but **Clever**,
**Careful**, and **Quick** are synergistic with many Alchemy related
Stunts.

### Stunts

Alchemist characters might find the following Stunt categories of
interest: [Alchemy Stunts](#alchemy-stunts), [Dastardly
Stunts](#dastardly-stunts), [Competence Stunts](#competence-stunts).

The following Stunts might be of particular interest to an alchemist.

#### Prepared Caster (Alchemy)

While there are other ways to represent an alchemist in Pathfinder Fate
Accelerated, the most direct way to make a dedicated alchemist is to
simply take the **Prepared Caster (Alchemy)** Stunt.

The Stunt offers good value for its Refresh equivalency due to the
downside of turning off free casting for a character that takes the
Stunt, and allows a dedicated alchemist to have a generous prepared item
limit.

::: {.Example}
[Xarren](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Xarren/Xarren.aspx) is
a learned and erudite master of internal alchemy.

In addition to a comprehensive knowledge of alchemical substances, he is
also a skilled physicker and holds the secrets of transmogrification and
rarefication of corporeal forms.

He seeks the fabled Praxis Perstolian Philosophica, a tome detailing an
ancient system of philosophical alchemy nearly lost to the world.
:::

:::description
**Prepared Caster (Alchemy):**

Because of my studies as a classically trained Alchemist, given time and
opportunity I may \'prepare\' a number of potions, elixirs, salves and
similar \'concoctions\' equal to **((Careful + Clever + Focused) \*
Arcane)**.

Unused concoctions remain until they get activated or destroyed and can
be stockpiled. These Aspects are portable; I may give them to others and
they can be taken away from me.

Making a concoction requires time, materials, and either a lab or a
field kit; the specifics are left to the GM\'s discretion, but simple
potions might take minutes while very powerful potions might take one or
more hours.

If a strict economy is being enforced in the campaign, it usually costs
about half retail price to make a concoction; GM\'s discretion applies.

To prepare a concoction I roll 4dF and add (Focused + Arcane) against a
Mediocre (+0) difficulty; failure indicates a botched concoction and
that \'slot\' is wasted for the day. I temporarily gain a new personal
Aspect corresponding to the concoction I prepared with **one invoke, and
annotated with the margin of success**.

Prepared concoctions are activated by invoking its Aspect as an action
and resolving the effect of the concoction using the previously rolled
margin of success. It is possible for a concoction resolution to fail if
the margin of success is insufficient to the difficulty or if opposed
successfully. If I am the activator, I can spend a Fate point at this
time to add +2 shifts to the margin of success.

Unfortunately due to my focus on Alchemy, I cannot free cast spells.

This stunt requires Arcane +1 or better to use.

*Commodities*

Alchemical concoctions can be given, sold to, or stolen by others and
used by them. They are effectively a commodity.

However all of an alchemist\'s concoctions, including those under
another character\'s control, count against their preparation limit.

*Alchemical Item Write-ups*

A variety of write-ups for [sample alchemical items] and [sample
potions] are available. Each usage of these kinds of alchemical items
counts against an alchemist\'s preparation limit.

Note that the provided write-ups are just examples, and not a restricted
list of allowed effects; an alchemist can make any sort of alchemical
item the GM allows.
:::

:::tip
As Prepared Casting is handled as a Stunt and Fate Accelerated
characters are allowed to swap Stunts at milestones, it is technically
possible for strange shenanigans to come up. However, it is recommended
that Prepared Casting Stunts be anchored by a character\'s High Concept,
and can thus only be taken or removed when an appropriate High Concept
is taken or changed. This equates to character creation and major
milestones, and avoids casual fluctuations.
:::

##### Prepared Casting (Alchemy Dabbler)

A character that wants to use the prepared casting model Stunt without
giving up the ability to free cast spells can take a version of the
**Prepared Casting (Alchemy)** Stunt that offers a smaller prepared item
limit but without the free casting restriction.

A character with Arcane +1 or better can take the following Stunt, thus
making themselves an alchemist. At the GM\'s discretion, this model
could be extended to Divine and / or Primal as well with suitable name
and \"chrome\" changes.

:::description
**Prepared Caster (Alchemy Dabbler)**:

Because I am a capable dabbler in the esoteric science of Alchemy, given
time and opportunity I may \'prepare\' a number of potions, elixirs,
salves and similar \'concoctions\' equal to **(Careful + Arcane)**.

Unused concoctions remain until they get activated or destroyed and can
be stockpiled. These Aspects are portable; I may give them to others and
they can be taken away from me.

Making a concoction requires time, materials, and either a lab or a
field kit; the specifics are left to the GM\'s discretion, but simple
potions might take minutes while very powerful potions might take one or
more hours.

If a strict economy is being enforced in the campaign, it usually costs
about half retail price to make a concoction; GM\'s discretion applies.

To prepare a concoction I roll 4dF and add Arcane against a Mediocre
(+0) difficulty; failure indicates a botched concoction and that
\'slot\' is wasted for the day. I temporarily gain a new personal Aspect
corresponding to the concoction I prepared with **one invoke, and
annotated with the margin of success**.

Prepared concoctions are activated by invoking its Aspect as an action
and resolving the effect of the concoction using the previously rolled
margin of success. It is possible for a concoction resolution to fail if
the margin of success is insufficient to the difficulty or if opposed
successfully. If I am the activator, I can spend a Fate point at this
time to add +2 shifts to the margin of success.

This stunt requires Arcane +1 or better to use.

*Commodities*

Alchemical concoctions can be given, sold to, or stolen by others and
used by them. They are effectively a commodity.

However all of an alchemist\'s concoctions, including those under
another character\'s control, count against their preparation limit.

*Alchemical Item Write-ups*

A variety of write-ups for \[sample alchemical items\] and \[sample
potions\] are available. Each usage of these kinds of alchemical items
counts against an alchemist\'s preparation limit.

Note that the provided write-ups are just examples, and not a restricted
list of allowed effects; an alchemist can make any sort of alchemical
item the GM allows.
:::

#### Special Purpose Stunts

An ability that is thematically \"alchemical\" can be expressed as one
or more Stunts that define their own function.

Also, it may sometimes make sense to define such a Stunt in a way that
it instead interacts with a Archetype other than the character\'s
primary spell casting Archetype, thus expanding the breadth of the kind
of effects the character can use.

::: {.Example}
[Ruelga](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Ruelga/Ruelga.aspx) is
an enchantingly beautiful Jadwiga hailing from the land of Irrisen.

Older than she seems, Ruelga is a descendant of the legendary Baba Yaga,
and heir to ancient and somewhat primitive but dangerously insidious
magics including the ability to make various potions and poisons.
:::

:::description
**Theriaxis**: Because I am a dedicated scholar who has mastered highly
esoteric magical and medical lore, I am able to make and apply
ointments, salves, nostrums, and elixirs that can heal and repair just
about any form of illness, wound, infection, or impurity. While I am
Carefully Arcane and I have access to my alchemical supplies, I may
clear a Stress box or clear a Consequence by overcoming a difficulty
equal to the numerical value of the stress box or Consequence. If I fail
to overcome the difficulty of a Consequence I may not attempt to heal
that same Consequence again. I may use this ability on others as well as
myself if I am able to examine and treat them. I may use this ability
(Focused + Arcane) times per day.

This stunt requires Arcane +1 or better to use.
:::

:::description
**Potions, Poultices, Poisons**: Because I know ancient lores from more
primitive times, I am able to brew potions, poultices, and poisons that
can harm and heal and work odd and subtle magics on those who imbide
them. I can be Cleverly Arcane and make substances that replicate
effects that are usually the province of Primal. At any given time I can
have a number of substances brewed up and ready for use equal to my
Arcane + Primal capability.

This stunt requires Arcane +1 or better to use.
:::

:::description
**Restorative Elixir**: Because of my alchemical studies I am able to
create and then later use restorative elixirs.

When I am Carefully Focused I gain +3 to overcome vs a Superb (+5)
difficulty.

If I am successful I remove all debilitating situational Aspects
currently affecting my health or normal functioning that have a
difficulty to remove of Great (+4) or less. This does not work on
environmental Aspects, scene Aspects, or other situational Aspects that
affect me externally, it only works against situational Aspects that
affect me directly and personally such as poison, fatigue, some spells,
curses, and so forth.

Additionally, if I am successful, I may also clear one of my stress
boxes or a Mild Consequence.

To use this ability I must be able to access the elixir and drink its
contents.

For a given session I can make and carry around a number of Restorative
Elixirs equal to my (Clever + Arcane). Other people can use my
restorative elixirs, but only gain +1 while Carefully Focused when using
one of them. Restorative elixirs given to others do count against my
per-session limit.

This stunt requires Arcane +1 or better to use.
:::

#### Bombs

Chucking \"bombs\" or grenade-like weapons can be an effective and
memorable way for an alchemist to make their presense felt when things
get ugly.

One way to approach alchemical bombs is to treat them as merely a way to
inflict stress on multiple targets.

It is also possible to define bombs that do other things, such as
**Sticky Bombs**, or bombs that disrupt specific kinds of opponents such
as **Holly Water Vials**.

::: {.Example}
[Olivin](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Olivin/Olivin.aspx) is
an experienced globadier, dropping gas bombs and other alchemical
devices to befuddle and harm his adversaries.

And when that doesn\'t get the job done, he\'s got a bunch of other
alchemical tricks tucked away in various belt pouches and pockets.

Which is fortunate, since his penchant for snooping gets Olivin in over
his head frequently.
:::

:::description
**Acid Bombs**: Because of my alchemical studies I am able to create and
then later throw alchemical acid bombs. When I am Quickly Focused I gain
+3 to attack a target within two (2) zones of me by throwing an
alchemical acid bomb at them.

If I am successful, the acid bomb shatters, splashing its contents upon
my target and inflicting damage as stress normally, but if I succeed
with style, I must reduce the stress to get a boost and the boost is
upgraded to the situational Aspect **Acid Burn!** which is attached to
the target.

This Aspect is automatically invoked at the beginning of subsequent
exchanges to inflict two (2) stress to the target per invoke. This
Aspect can be removed by overcoming a Good (+3) difficulty.

For a given session I can carry around and use a number of acid bombs
equal to my (Clever + Arcane). Other people can use my acid bombs; they
still count against my per-session limit however.

This stunt requires Arcane +1 or better to use.
:::

:::description
**Alchemical Bombs**: Because of my alchemical studies I am able to
create and then later throw alchemical bombs. When I am Cleverly Focused
I gain +1 to throw a bomb into my zone or an adjacent zone, generally
against an Average (+1) difficulty.

If I am successful, my bomb explodes and inflicts a number of shifts of
damage equal to my (Careful + Arcane) against every target in the zone
without splitting shifts between them. This is non-discriminatory, and
often causes collateral damage.

For a given session I can carry around and use a number of alchemical
bombs equal to my (Clever + Arcane). Other people can not catalyze my
bombs, they are only usable by me.

This stunt requires Arcane +1 or better to use.
:::

:::description
**Gas Bombs**: Because of my alchemical studies I am able to create and
then later throw alchemical gas bombs.

When I am Carefully Focused I gain +3 to attack a target zone within two
(2) zones of me by throwing an alchemical gas bomb.

If I am successful the gas bomb shatters, releasing toxic fumes and
applying the situational Aspect **Toxic Gas!** to the zone with two free
invokes.

This Aspect is automatically invoked now and at the beginning of
subsequent exchanges to inflict two (2) stress per invoke to every
target within the affected zone that needs to breathe. This Aspect can
be removed by strong winds or focused air by overcoming a Good (+3)
difficulty.

For a given session I can carry around and use a number of gas bombs
equal to my (Clever + Arcane). Other people can use my gas bombs; they
still count against my per-session limit however.

This stunt requires Arcane +1 or better to use.
:::

:::description
**Holy Water Vials**: Because I have learned a special alchemical
recipe, I am able to make a mildly magical mixture containing holly
water, garlic, powdered silver, and grave dust that causes harm to the
undead. These vials can be thrown, with the liquid splashing out upon
impact to inflict harm on an undead creature.

When I am Quickly Focused I gain +4 to attack an undead target within
one (1) zone of me.

If I am successful, the holly water vial shatters, splashing its
contents upon my target and inflicting damage as stress normally, but
this damage **cannot be reduced** by any innate ability of the
target (other forms of protection such as a magic item or a spell do
apply).

For a given session I can carry around and use a number of holly water
vials equal to my (Clever + Arcane). Other people can use my holly water
vials; they still count against my per-session limit however.

This stunt requires Arcane +1 or better to use.
:::

:::description
**Sticky Bombs**: Because of my alchemical studies I am able to create
and then later throw alchemical sticky bombs.

When I am Quickly Focused I gain +3 to create advantage against a target
within two (2) zones of me by throwing a sticky bomb at them.

If I am successful, the sticky bomb shatters, splashing its sticky
contents upon my target, attaching the situational Aspect **Trapped By
Sticky Goo!** to the target with three (3) invokes. While this Aspect is
in play, the target is rooted in their current zone and thus cannot move
to another zone. This Aspect can be removed by overcoming a Good (+4)
difficulty, but each failed attempt to overcome it expends an invoke.

This Aspect can be removed by overcoming a Good (+4) difficulty. However
when it is expended or removed a second situational Aspect, **Sticky Goo
Residue!**, is attached to the target with four (4) invokes. The second
Aspect prevents the target from moving more than one (1) zone per
action, and they cannot both move and attack. The second Aspect can be
removed by overcoming a Superb (+6) difficulty, but each failed attempt
to overcome it expends an invoke.

Note that this ability can cause flying targets to plummet to the ground
if they use winged flight.

For a given session I can carry around and use a number of sticky bombs
equal to my (Clever + Arcane). Other people can use my sticky bombs;
they still count against my per-session limit however.

This stunt requires Arcane +1 or better to use.
:::

#### Mutagens

While they may also grant secondary benefits, the fundamental nature of
mutagen Stunts is to allow a character to temporarily move their
Approaches and / or Archetype bonuses around to a different disposition
suited to an alternate physical form.

This can range from \"hulking out\", to taking on the forms and natural
abilities of animals, or something more unusual.

As this kind of ability is unusually powerful and offers a tremendous
amount of flexibility to a single character, it is usually appropriate
for this sort of Stunt to cost a Fate point or have scene or session
limits. However, the higher the Refresh equivalency of a Stunt the less
restricted it needs to be.

Ultimately, GM\'s discretion applies heavily to this sort of ability.

:::description
**Mutagen (Bruteform)**: Because I have mastered strange transmogrifying
magics I can concoct substances that allow me to change my own physical
structure and capacity, becoming much larger and stronger but at the
cost of greatly diminished intellgence. I may spend a Fate point to
temporarily move all of my Approach bonuses to Forceful (leaving all of
my other Approaches at +0), and to move all of my Archetype bonuses to
Focused (leaving all of my other Archetypes at +0). I also change my
Trouble to **\'Mutagenic Brute\'**. This lasts for an entire scene
unless I spend another Fate point to change back to normal.

This stunt requires Arcane +1 or better to use.
:::

:::description
**Mutagen (Beastshape; -2)**: Because I have mastered strange
transmogrifying magics I can concoct substances that allow me to change
my own physical structure and capacity, taking on the forms of animals.
I may spend a Fate point to temporarily assume an animal form. My
trappings magically change with me and are unavailable until I return to
my normal form.

When I change forms I move all of my Approach bonuses to a disposition
relevant to the animal form I am assuming, and I move all of my
Archetype bonuses to Focused (leaving all of my other Archetypes at +0).
This lasts for an entire scene unless I choose to return to normal,
which ends the effect. Additionally, I may spend another Fate point to
assume a different animal\'s form, and I do not have to first change
back to normal.

When I change forms I gain an additional Aspect named for the animal
form I have assumed which I can invoke when my current animal form is
relevant, and which can be compelled whenever my animal form or lack of
humanoid anatomy might inconvenience me.

If the animal form I change into has natural weapons I may use Focused
in place of Combatives while in a physical conflict.

If the animal form I change into has an unusual form of movement, such
as the flight of a bird, the running of a wolf, or the swimming of a
shark then I gain that mode of movement while I am in that form as well,
at the GM\'s discretion.

If the animal form I change into has an unusual or extra keen sense,
such as the low light vision of a cat, the olfactory senses of a canine,
or the echolocation of a bat then I gain that sense while I am in that
form as well, at the GM\'s discretion.

This stunt requires Arcane +1 or better to use.
:::

:::description
**Mutagen (Elementalform, -2)**: Because I have mastered strange
transmogrifying magics I can concoct substances that allow me to change
my own physical structure and capacity. I may spend two (2) Fate points
to temporarily change into an Elemental.

When I activate this effect I must choose Air, Earth, Fire, or Water.
For the duration of the effect I use the Large Elemental write-up for
the elemental type I have chosen instead of my own character write-up.
(See [sample mutagen elemental forms](#sample-mutagen-elemental-forms)
for example elemental types.)

My transformation lasts for an entire scene but I may change back to my
normal form at any time, ending the effect.

My trappings change with me and are inaccessible for the duration of the
effect.

This stunt requires Arcane +1 or better to use.
:::

### Source Material Notes

Pathfinder alchemists are less brewers of potions and more of an odd
combination of Dr. Jekyl & Mr. Hyde crossed with a Mad Bomber. There is
no need to take that particular path in Pathfinder Fate Accelerated, but
for those who want to adhere to the source material such abilities can
easily be handled by Stunts.

## The Barbarian

This section provides suggestions and insights into how to translate the
ideas of the Barbarian class from the source material into Pathfinder
Fate Accelerated.

:::flavor
\"Barbarians excel in combat, possessing the martial prowess and
fortitude to take on foes seemingly far superior to themselves.

With rage granting them boldness and daring beyond that of most other
warriors, barbarians charge furiously into battle and ruin all who would
stand in their way.

For some, there is only rage. In the ways of their people, in the fury
of their passion, in the howl of battle, conflict is all these brutal
souls know.

Savages, hired muscle, masters of vicious martial techniques, they are
not soldiers or professional warriors\-\--they are the battle possessed,
creatures of slaughter and spirits of war.

Known as barbarians, these warmongers know little of training,
preparation, or the rules of warfare; for them, only the moment exists,
with the foes that stand before them and the knowledge that the next
moment might hold their death. They possess a sixth sense in regard to
danger and the endurance to weather all that might entail.

These brutal warriors might rise from all walks of life, both civilized
and savage, though whole societies embracing such philosophies roam the
wild places of the world. Within barbarians storms the primal spirit of
battle, and woe to those who face their rage.\"
:::

:::sidebar
#### Sample Iconics

[Kiroee](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Kiroee/Kiroee.aspx),
[Kazzar](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Kazzar/Kazzar.aspx),
[Oarg](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Oarg/Oarg.aspx)
:::

:::sidebar
#### Starting Archetype Sets

**Tribal Warrior**: Combative +3, Focused +1

**Savage**: Combative +2, Focused +1, Primal +1

**Brute**: Combative +2, Focused +2

**Manbeast**: Focused +3, Primal +1
:::

### Archetype Considerations

Three Archetypes are relevant to the barbarian concept, though a
particular barbarian only needs some combination of two of them.

**Combatives** covers the \"warrior\" facet of the barbarian, while
**Focused** covers the \"unsullied physical specimen\" facet, and
**Primal** covers the \"master of uncivilized wildlands\" facet.

Pathfinder type barbarians tend to favor Combatives and the **Tribal
Warrior** set of Starting Archetypes is probably the closest match.
The **Savage** set of Starting Archetypes is a good match for most \"old
school\" barbarians from earlier editions of D & D as well as pulp
fiction.

The **Brute** or **Manbeast** sets of Starting Archetypes are a good way
to go for more of a burly unstoppable force or wildman sort of
barbarian.

**Primal** is the least essential Archetype of the three for a
barbarian; +0 to +1 is sufficient for most barbarians, with +2 being
unusual but not entirely outre. **Primal** +3 and higher blurs the
concept and starts to drift into druid or ranger territory.

**Combatives** is the most superficially obvious Archetype for a
barbarian, but actually isn\'t all that essential as **Focused** can
very easily be made to do double duty in conflicts at the cost of one or
more Stunt slots.

**Combatives** from +0 and higher works just fine with no upper limit,
so long as it doesn\'t completely overshadow the other facets of the
character to the point that the supposed barbarian is indistinguishable
from Johnny Fighter from the Big City.

**Focused** is the most defining Archetype of the three, harkening back
to Robert Howard\'s envisioning of barbarians at the dawn of the Sword &
Sorcery genre. All barbarians should have at least **Focused** +1.

Unlike monks and psions and other character types that favor high
**Focused** who start evincing supernatural or normalcy-defying
abilities at +3 and higher, barbarians tend to show their exceptionalism
by exaggerating all of their innate attributes to be flat out superior
to other normal people. They are objectively stronger, tougher, quicker
of wit, more perceptive, and faster than ordinary men\...particularly
*\'civilized\'* men (with civilized being used as a pejorative meaning
weak and decadent).

Scaling impossible cliffs, wrestling with gorillas and winning, seeing
further than a hawk, speaking so many languages learned from their
travels that a scholarly linguist would be put to shame\...things like
that.

### Approach Considerations

Barbarians are rarely **Careful**, but some like to lay a **Sneaky**
ambush from time to time.

Though they rarely have a formal education many barbarians are
surprisingly **Clever**, gifted with natural intellect sharpened by the
harsh realities of survival.

Many, perhaps most, barbarians are **Forceful**, but some grandstanders
trend more towards **Flashy**. And barbarians are often **Quick** for
their size.

### What Kind Of Barbarian, Exactly?

Generally speaking, when defining a character in Pathfinder Fate
Accelerated that you envision falling into the \"barbarian\" category,
you might start out by asking yourself the following questions:

1.  Is my barbarian more of a feral brute or a \"noble savage\"?
2.  Is my barbarian more of a physical phenom super-athelete or a
    fearsome warrior?
3.  How does my barbarian defeat their enemies?
4.  Is my barbarian a berserker?

For instance, a fearsome but noble warrior of a remote village of
hillfolk who spent his formative years helping the warriors of the tribe
fend off the predations of a nearby clan of ogres is more of a
Combatives based character with either Focused or Primal or a split,
while a hulking brute raised by bears who lived on his own until
captured and sold as a pit fighting slave but ultimately broke loose and
slew his \"owners\" would be more of a Focused and Primal based
character.

The fourth question is where things get sticky.

#### Feral or Noble Savage?

Some barbarians are pretty primitive, perhaps even vestiges of an
earlier age. Others are part of a vibrant and rich culture that has not
succumbed to the decadent lure of so-called civilization.

The Pathfinder setting of Golarion has a number of suitable cultures for
a barbarian to originate from, such as the Mammoth Lords, or the
Shoanti, or the people who inhabit the Lands of the Linnorm Kings.

Answering this question will fill in your character\'s background and
will probably also influence your High Concept. It might very well also
drive your selection of Trouble, other Aspects, and Stunts.

#### Physical Phenom or Fearsome Warrior?

Some barbarians are just physically and perhaps mentally overpowering,
and rely on their innate superiority to defeat lesser folks. Other
barbarians come from a culture with a proud warrior tradition, and they
learn skill at arms from childhood on up in due course to being
recognized as an adult.

Answering this question will influence your choice of Archetypes, and
possibly Approaches as well. It will also impact whatever trappings your
character might carry, and may inspire one or more of your Aspects and
Stunts.

For a physical phenom type of barbarian, favor **Focused** +2 or +3. For
a barbarian from a rich warrior tradition, consider **Combatives**
+1 or +2. For a barbarian from a culture that lives rough in the
wildlands such as nomads or hillfolk, consider **Primal** +1 or +2.

With Stunt support you might also consider **Focused** +4 and play a
character akin to [the monk](#the-monk), but with the background and
attitude of a barbarian.

::: {.Example}
[Kazzar](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Kazzar/Kazzar.aspx) is
a barbarian thug blessed with astounding physical prowess, but not as
gifted in the realm of mental faculties. Utterly ignorant and out of
place in civilized lands, this crude lout thumps those who have things
he wants and takes their shinies. Still alive only due to his nearly
supernatural resilience and prowess, this brutish half orc careens
through existence from one disastrous misadventure to another.
:::

#### Conquest or Dominance?

Barbarians embrace the harsh reality of life, which is that strife is
inevitable. In a cruel and brutal world violence is sometimes necessary,
even if it is thrust upon you. How a given barbarian prefers to combat
their enemies says a lot about them.

Some barbarians prefer to meet violence head on, eye to eye, blades
crossed and to the victor goes the spoils. Others are more crafty and
prefer to lure their foolish foes into the wildlands and harry them
unmercifully. Some barbarians are content to physically defeat their
opponents and be done with it, but others must also prove themselves
superior first and crush their enemies will to fight before striking the
final blow.

Most barbarians are completely ok with doing whatever they feel like and
taking whatever they want by force, but others have codes of warrior
honor or must adhere to complex traditions or rites which constrain
their actions with nearly as much stringency as a paladin\'s vows.

Thinking about these nuances should help you shade in the subtleties of
your barbarian\'s personality and world view, and possibly firm up an
Aspect and / or a Stunt.

#### To Berserk Or Not Berserk?

In Pathfinder, a barbarian is always a berserker, baring any
\"archetype\" (as defined in the Pathfinder rule books) shenanigans. The
class might as well have been called \"The Berserker\".

There is much to be said for going the berserker route; from a
roleplaying perspective barbarians tend to be easy to play as the
concept has a way of rendering decision making very easy when portraying
one. See a threat, get angry and smash it.

However there is also much to be said for not making your barbarian a
berserker, harkening back to the idea of the barbarian **pre-D&D 3e**.
Whether your flavor is an **AD&D 2e** or **AD&D 1e Unearthed Arcana**
barbarian, or further back to something from swords & sorcery pulp
fiction, or if your inspiration comes from a real world people such as
the Vikings or the Mongols, there is a broad design space to operate
within to make interesting characters.

##### I Am NOT A Berzerker!

If you decide that your character is not a berserker, i.e. is not
anchored on the idea of entering a violent rage to fight opponents, then
you are free to allocate your Aspects and Stunts however you like to
make your character interesting to you.

::: {.Example}
[Oarg](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Oarg/Oarg.aspx) is an
example of a barbarian who is not a berzerker. He\'s an extremely big,
physically dominant, uncivilized brute, but he\'s eager to expand his
horizons by exploring the many wonders of the world.
:::

##### I Am A Berzerker!

If your character is a berserker, then you should make sure to
incorporate that idea into their Aspects. If it is the dominant idea of
the character, then it should be reflected in their High Concept. If
your character\'s propensity towards anger causes problems in their
life, work that into the character\'s Trouble.

When it comes to making your character\'s berzerk rage impact 4dF
outcomes, the simplest option is to maintain a reserve of Fate points
and spend them to invoke the character\'s anger-related Aspect or High
Concept when anger might be helpful and you want a mechanical bonus.

Another option is you can use one or more create advantage actions to
attach a situational Aspect (or add invokes to your character\'s Aspect
or High Concept) to yourself indicating your character\'s ire and use
any free invokes on it, thereby conserving your Fate points but
otherwise having the same end result.

Finally, if you want something more concrete or reliable, you probably
will want to use at least one Stunt slot defining how your character
benefits from their berserk rage. Decide how you want your character\'s
rage to benefit them and make a Stunt that enables your idea. See the
[Stunt options](#stunt-options) section for ideas on how to do this.

::: {.Example}
[Kiroee](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Kiroee/Kiroee.aspx) is
an iconic barbarian who is driven by her unfocused but boundless rage!
The full profundity of her constant ire is reflected in her High
Concept, focused further in one of her Aspects, and is suggested at in
her Trouble.

And she has several Stunts that key into her berzerker nature. Her
\"Anger Management\" Stunt is the engine that drives it all,
automatically adding free invokes to her own High Concept but at a cost;
these invokes can be used as necessary to represent her enraged potency.
Secondarily her \"Swift Fury\" Stunt allows her to use those invokes
specifically for extra movement so that she can close with enemies and
smash them.

Finally her \"Attack Attack ATTACK!!!!\" Stunt, though not directly tied
in to her anger, illustrates her reckless all-out aggression and rounds
the character out as a fearsome foe to face in a conflict, but easy to
land hits on.
:::

### Stunts

Barbarian characters might find the following Stunt categories of
interest: [Warrior Stunts](#warrior-stunts), [Primordial
Stunts](#primordial-stunts), [Durability Stunts](#durability-stunts),
[Competence Stunts](#competence-stunts), [Innate
Stunts](#innate-stunts).

The following Stunts are offered as samples that might be relevant for
some barbarians. However, the best Stunts are those that are tailor made
to fit your concept, so don\'t hesitate to come up with your own or work
with your GM to define something that is \"just right\" for your
character. See the [Stunt Options](#stunt-options) section for ideas on
how to do this.

#### Physical Specimens

Many barbarians are exceptionally fit and athletic, with sharp senses,
agility, strength, and durability.

:::description
**Alertness**: Because I am unusually alert and perceptive I gain +2
while Focused to notice things.
:::

:::description
**Damage Reduction**: Because I am more durable than normal, I reduce by
one (1) all stress inflicted on me by physical and magical attacks.
:::

:::description
**Dodgy**: Because I am good at getting out of the way of danger, I gain
+1 to defend when I am Quick.
:::

:::description
**Incorrigibly Competitive**: Because I am incorrigibly competitive and
driven to win, I gain +2 while Flashily Focused to create advantage or
overcome when engaged in any kind of one on one physical, mental, or
social contest, ranging from duels to drinking contests to arm wrestling
bouts to put-down matches to poker face offs and more.
:::

:::description
**Primal Reduction**: Because I am significantly more rugged, robust,
and survivable due to my deep connection with primal forces, I reduce by
one (1) all physical stress inflicted on me, and I reduce by two (2) all
environmental stress inflicted on me.
:::

:::description
**Raw Charisma**: Because I am naturally likeable and charismatic, I may
use Focused instead of Roguish for social interactions related to making
friends and influencing people. I gain +1 while Focused to create
advantage or overcome challenges when using this Stunt. However some
people innately distrust charming people, and I sometimes meet
unexpected friction to my overtures.

When using this Stunt I can be compelled by the GM to fail.
:::

:::description
**Resilience**: Because of my impressive resilience, once per session if
I would take a Consequence I may instead spend a Fate point.
:::

:::description
**Warrior\'s Mettle**: Because I have trained extensively and am made of
sterner stuff than most people, I may use Combatives to defend against
ranged attacks and targeted magic by deflecting such attacks with a
precise flick or parry of my weapon, or with my armor or a shield, or by
some other means justified by the narrative.

This Stunt requires Combative +2 to use.

:::tip
Combative +3 and higher already allows a character to do this.
This Stunt is for characters who have Combative +2 and are willing to
allocate a Stunt to gain this ability.
:::
:::

:::description
**Very Strong**: Because I am so strong, I get +2 while I am Forcefully
Focused and create advantage or overcome when my great strength is a
factor.
:::

#### Aggressive Warriors

Many barbarians fight with incredible vigor and ferocity, overwhelming
foes with the sheer force of their unrelenting assault.

:::description
**Aggressive Assault**: Because I am driven to extreme aggression, when
I am Forcefully Combative and attack I may add from one to four
additional Fate dice to my 4dF attack roll and choose the four best dice
as my result. However, until my next exchange whenever I defend I add
the same number of Fate dice to my defend rolls and choose the four
worst dice as my result.
:::

:::description
**Barbarian Beatdown**: Because I\'m able to use my athleticism and
physical advantages to good effect in a fight, I may use Focused instead
of Combative when fighting with an appropriate weapon.
:::

:::description
**Barehanded Fighting**: Because my fighting skills include barehanded
combat, I may use Combative instead of Focused when fighting barehanded
or grappling.
:::

:::description
**Brawler**: Because I am so strong, I get +2 while I am Forcefully
Focused and attack when fighting unarmed or grappling or when throwing
heavy blunt things.
:::

:::description
**Bums Rush**: Because I like to overwhelm others, I get +2 when I am
Forceful and attempt to tackle or bowl over an opponent.
:::

:::description
**Forcefully Aggressive**: Because I am so physically powerful, I get +1
when I am Forceful and attack.
:::

:::description
**Fueled By Suffering**: Because I channel my pain and suffering and
become more dangerous when I am in danger, when I take stress or
consequences from attacks I gain a Boost called **Fueled By Suffering**.
:::

:::description
**Indomitable**: Because I refuse to give in and I always vigorously
protect myself, I get +1 when I am Forceful and defend if I am aware
that I am in danger.
:::

:::description
**Making It Count**: Because I am able to make my attacks really matter,
on an attack that succeeds with style I may spend a fate point to
prevent the target from checking a stress box to reduce the stress of
the attack. The target may still take consequences.
:::

:::description
**One Against Many**: Because I am skilled at defending myself against
multiple attackers, I gain +2 to defend when I fight alone against two
or more opponents. A single mook defined as a mob counts as being
multiple opponents for purposes of this ability as long as there are two
or more \'individuals\' within the mob. \'Fighting alone\' in this
context means no allies are in my zone or an adjacent zone, and no ally
is aiding me or attacking my opponents.
:::

:::description
**Pounce!**: Because I excel at leaping into combat in a startling burst
of aggression, I gain +4 on my first attack in a conflict if I act first
and can charge, lunge at, or pounce upon an opponent.
:::

:::description
**Powerful Attack**: Because I am so skilled at delivering forceful
attacks, I gain +2 when I am Forcefully Combative and attack while armed
with a weapon.
:::

:::description
**Push Beyond The Edge**: Because I fight to the bitter end no matter
what the cost, at any time as a non action if my Severe consequence is
currently clear I may choose to either worsen my Moderate consequence
(if any) to a Severe consequence or take a new Severe consequence
**Pushed Myself Too Far** to clear my Mild Consequences and all my
Stress boxes.
:::

:::description
**Retribution**: Because my retribution is terrible when I succesfully
attack an opponent who has inflicted stress or consequences upon me in
the current conflict I inflict +1 shift more damage and this damage
cannot be reduced.
:::

:::description
**Terrifying Roar**: Because I am able to make a terrifying noise, I
gain +1 when being Flashy and attempting to frighten or demoralize.
Alternately, once per scene if I move a zone and attack while Flashy I
may also attempt to create advantage to frighten or demoralize everyone
in the same zone as my target as a free action.
:::

#### Unsullied By Civilization

Barbarians generally eshew the so-called advantages of civilization,
regarding city life as decadent and regressive. They instead take great
pride in more practical skills such as using one\'s environment
effectively, living off the land, being skilled at the hunt, and
remaining adaptable to whatever situation they might find themselves in.

:::description
**Ambusher**: Because I am great at setting up ambushes, I gain +1 when
I Sneakily set up an ambush or create a related advantage.
:::

:::description
**Just Roll With It**: Because I excel at avoiding harm and rolling with
whatever comes my way, I can use more than one stress box to absorb
stress from an attack (normally, only one stress box may be used to
offset stress from a single attack).
:::

:::description
**Living Off The Land**: Because I am adept at surviving off of what
nature offers me, I am always able to find enough food and water to keep
myself and a couple of other people or animals healthy while in
wildlands and rural areas (i.e. above ground and not near a city or
town). Additionally if I\'ve had at least half a day to become familiar
with the terrain in a specific area of wilderness I gain +1 on all
actions while being Primal. How large the area of wilderness might be is
left to the GM\'s discretion, but it should be at least five square
miles.
:::

:::description
**Naturally Sneaky**: Because I am innately good at being sneaky, I may
use Focused instead of Roguish or Primal when Sneakily attempting to
avoid notice. However, I suffer a -1 penalty when I do so.
:::

:::description
**Naturally Sneaky (-2)**: Because I am innately good at being sneaky, I
may use Focused instead of Roguish or Primal when Sneakily attempting to
avoid notice.
:::

:::description
**Rural Warrior**: Because I am skilled at using practical, functional
weapons such as hunting spears and bows, woodsman axes, cudgels,
lariats, and weapons derived from farming equipment I am a surprisingly
effective combatant when armed appropriately. Though my fighting style
is no-frills and straightforward, when armed with an appropriate weapon
I can use Focused in place of Combatives in armed physical conflicts and
I gain +1 to create advantage attempts that utilize my unusual weaponry
in interesting ways.
:::

:::description
**Strider**: Because I am fleet of foot and able to move quickly, if I
am in a conflict and do nothing in an exchange except move, I may move
an extra zone and I am unobstructed by foot hazards of less than knee
height. If I am in a contest involving me walking rapidly or running, I
gain +1 to overcome while I am Quick.
:::

### Source Material Notes

#### Self-buffing Striker

The source material has a very particular expression of \"barbarians\"
as combat focused characters who have the ability to \"rage\", which is
essentially a \"self-buff\" offering improved combat numbers that gets
progressively better as the barbarian character levels up.

#### Savage Fitness

Additionally a barbarian gets an improved movement rate, more hit
points, eventually becomes more resistent to damage, gains the ability
to avoid traps, hyper reflexes allowing the evasion of various kinds of
threats, and so on.

There are also various \"rage\" related feats that may be taken to kit
out or leverage the raging buff for various purposes, and a selection of
\"archetypes\" (as defined in the Pathfinder rule books) that allow the
tailoring of class abilties to better suit a concept.

#### Diverging From Source Material

Pathfinder and D&D 3e offer up the barbarian as a raging brute, while
earlier editions of Dungeons & Dragons presented an uncivilized
barbarian unsullied by the decadence of city life; generally more
\"Conan\" and less \"Roid Rage\". And there is a good deal of sword &
sorcery fiction to draw on for inspiration.

However, you shouldn\'t feel obligated to adhere to source material; you
are free to be creative. Assign your Approach and Archetype bonuses, and
define your character\'s Aspects and Stunts to best realize *your*
\"barbarian\" concept.

## The Bard

This section provides suggestions and insights into how to translate the
ideas of the Bard class from the source material into Pathfinder Fate
Accelerated.

:::flavor
\"Bards capably confuse and confound their foes while inspiring their
allies to ever-greater daring. While accomplished with both weapons and
magic, the true strength of bards lies outside melee, where they can
support their companions and undermine their foes without fear of
interruptions to their performances.\"
:::

:::sidebar
#### Sample Iconics

[Nomis](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Nomis/Nomis.aspx),
[Orlo](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Orlo/Orlo.aspx),
[Adriel](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Adriel/Adriel.aspx)
:::

:::sidebar
#### Starting Archetype Sets

**Gish**: Combative +1, Roguish +1, Arcane +2

**Dilettante**: Combative +1, Roguish +1, Focused +1, ??? +1

**Jack-of-all-Trades**: Focused +4
:::

### Archetype Considerations

Due to the diversity of the bardic concept, choice of Archetypes for a
given individual bard is also diverse.

Generally speaking, when defining a character in Pathfinder Fate
Accelerated that you envision falling into the \"bard\" category, you
might start out by asking yourself:

\"Am I trying to adhere to the conception of a bard put forth in a
specific version of the source material, or am I doing my own thing?\"\"

If the answer is \"doing my own thing\", you should also ask yourself
the following questions:

1.  Is my character more of a musician or a loremaster?
2.  Is my character more of a front-line combatant or a team supporter?
3.  Is my character a spellcaster, and if so what kind?

#### Celtic Hero And Master Of Lore

A player trying to make a more 1e AD&D style bard would start off with
Combative and Roguish, and perhaps Primal +1.

Then, over the course of three to five major milestones, crank up Primal
to at least +3 to gain druidic spell casting.

#### Musically Talented Gish

A player trying to make a more 2e AD&D style bard would start off with
Combative +1, Roguish +1, Arcane +2, or Roguish +2, Arcane +2, and a
Stunt to augment the use of Roguish for physical conflicts.

As major milestones pass, spread Archetype bonuses around evenly.

#### Magical Minstrel Cheerleader

A player trying to make a 3e D&D style bard would start off with Arcane
+3, Focused +1, and several Stunts to cover bardic performance and
bardic knowledge.

#### The Jack-of-all-Trades

Another approach is to take Focused +4 and a Stunt called
Jack-of-all-Trades, which allows a character to be able to do just about
anything at the cost of burning Fate points.

::: {.Descriptino}
**Jack-of-all-Trades (-3)**: Because I am a jack of all trades who has
studied an array of different crafts, during a scene I may spend a fate
point as a free action to allow myself to use Focused as if it were any
one other Archetype for the remainder of the scene. I may activate this
ability multiple times per scene to use more than one Archetype,
spending an additional fate point each time.
:::

However, the number of Stunt slots the Stunt requires and the constant
use of fate points imposes both a steep opportunity cost as well as a
lack of sustainability.

The trick to making this sort of a character work is having a good
Trouble that can reliably be compelled, such as **Dangerously Curious**,
or **Can\'t Mind My Own Business**, or **Danger Magnet**.

::: {.Example}
[Adriel](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Adriel/Adriel.aspx) is
an adaptable adventurer mentored by a crusty crew of heroes in many
things, including the art of the blade, magic, druidic lore, and the way
of the dodgy path.

Competent and capable, she seeks a grand destiny promised to her by an
aged druid.
:::

#### Doing My Own Thing

A player striking off on their own is free to mix and match their
Archetypes to suit their concept.

One option is to go the dilettante route of Combative +1, Roguish +1,
Focused +1, and either Arcane +1 or Primal +1.

This offers a wide base of basic ability, and is easy to build on as
major milestones accrue.

::: {.Example}
[Nomis](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Nomis/Nomis.aspx) is a
rebelious son of a barbarian champion, and a bit of a dilettante. A
lover rather than a fighter, quick to make friends instead of enemies,
glib of tongue and verse.

Nomis would rather carouse than conflict, but unfortunately he seems to
be marked by destiny to live an interesting life, blown upon the winds
of fortune into high adventure and derring do.
:::

::: {.Example}
[Orlo](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Orlo/Orlo.aspx) is an
arrogant scion of a nearly extinct line claiming Azlanti heritage. Born
with a rare mystical gift to see divinitory signs, and bearing a
powerful magical sword that has been in his family for generations, he
is well along on a personal journey to find a wife of unsullied lineage.

As [he gains in
experience](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Orlo/Epic/Orlo.aspx)
Orlo might further develop his latent magical abilities and improve his
warrior skills.
:::

### Approach Considerations

Very few bards are **Forceful** as they typically prefer finesse and
subtlety. However, a more aggressive or take charge bard might buck the
general trend.

Bards are stereotypically **Clever** and often flamboyantly **Flashy**.

Some bards are notably **Quick**, and a few who practice skulduggery or
espionage are **Sneaky** and **Careful**.

### Stunts

The following Stunts are offered as samples that might be relevant for
some bards.

However, bard characters are so diverse any given bard might find any
given Stunt of use. A variety of [Sample Stunts](#sample-stunts) are for
browsing.

And, of course, the best Stunts are those that are tailor made to fit
your concept\...so don\'t hesitate to come up with your own or work with
your GM to define something that is \"just right\" for your character.
See the [Stunt options](#stunt-options) section for ideas on how to do
this.

#### Socially Intelligent Entertainers

Many bards are educated (or can fake it), observant, keen of wit,
understanding of the nuances of interpersonal communication, know how to
work a crowd, and how to blend in. Some bards are well connected, others
excel at making fast friends whereever they might find themselves, and
still others have a knack for finding wealthy patrons.

:::description
**Alertness**: Because I am unusually alert and perceptive I gain +2
while Focused to notice things.
:::

:::description
**Aristocrat**: Because I am the heir to an aristocratic line with
history entangled with a nation state, ruling dynasty, or region I am
afforded respect, deference, and access to those in power far exceeding
anything justified by my own merit. The benefit of this is tied to the
political influence and power of whatever land or people my lineage is
attached to and in some situations can even be a compellable hindrance;
GM\'s discretion applies.
:::

:::description
**Can\'t We Find A Way To \'Work This Out\'Non-violently?**: Because I
am able to appeal to the baser instincts of most people and appear
extremely \'likeable\', I\'m good at avoiding unwanted conflict and
changing the nature of interaction from physical conflict to a mental
and social contest. I gain +2 whenever I attempt to avoid or end a
conflict via non-violence.
:::

:::description
**Charming And Coy**: Because I am adept at manipulating social
situations to my benefit, I gain +1 when I am Roguish and engage in a
social challenge, contest, or conflict.
:::

:::description
**Deceitful**: Because I am so deceitful, I get +2 when I am Cleverly
Roguish and create advantage or overcome challenges where my smooth
patter applies.
:::

:::description
**Friendly Diplomacy**: Because I am charmingly friendly to almost
everyone and am good at making friends and calming situations down, I
gain +2 whenever I attempt to avoid or end a conflict via non-violence,
keep the peace, or improve the \'mood of the room\'.
:::

:::description
**Morale Boosting Performance**: Because I am a naturally gifted
performer, I gain +2 when I am Flashily Focused and create subtle
advantages affecting morale or mental states, or help others overcome
challeges by motivating them, when I am able to make music. I can also
make long journeys less boring when stealth is not required, and make
some spare coin performing at taverns and such.
:::

:::description
**Seductive Domination**: Because I have the ability to take control of
the minds of others by seducing them, while I am Sneakily Focused I can
employ a vaneer of seduction or other predatory social wiles against a
living target in my zone that I am in close contact with. Each exchange
I continue my seduction I may make mental attacks against the target.
Consequences inflicted by this ability pertain to my gaining increasing
control over the target\'s mind. If the target concedes to me, the
target must do as I command in general but retains enough control to
avoid doing anything fundamentally against their nature (i.e. they may
resist one of my commands if they have a relevant Aspect). If the target
is taken out with this ability I assume full control of the target\'s
behavior until they are able to recover from the Consequences. This is a
mind-affecting ability.

This stunt requires Focused +3 or better to use.
:::

:::description
**Sense Deceit**: Because I am so skilled at sensing people\'s true
motives, I gain +2 when I am Cleverly Roguish and attempt to discern if
I am being deceived or tricked.
:::

#### Graced Existence

Many bards seem to enjoy a graced existence, more fortunate than they
have any right to be, favored by fate, destined for greater things, or
blessed with dumb luck.

:::description
**Better Lucky Than Good**: Because I am unusually lucky, whenever I
make a 4dF resolution roll and the result is 0 0 0 0 (all + + + + (all
pluses).
:::

:::description
**Charmed Existence**: Because I lead a charmed existence, whenever I
roll - - - - (all minuses) on 4dF I treat it as if I rolled 0 0 0 0 (all
blanks).
:::

:::description
**Close Call**: Because I excel at getting out of really bad situations,
I can spend a fate point to concede after I already rolled to defend
(normally a concession must be made instead of rolling to defend).
:::

:::description
**Fated Fortune**: Because I thrive under pressure, when I spend a fate
point to invoke one of my Aspects I gain a +3 bonus instead of a +2
bonus.
:::

:::description
**Favored By Fortune**: Because I am unusually lucky, I add +1 shift to
my total whenever I make a 4dF resolution roll and there are no minuses
(-) in the result.
:::

:::description
**Nothing Succeeds Like Success (-3)**: Because nothing succeeds like
success, when I succeed with style and gain a boost I may upgrade that
boost to a situational Aspect on myself called **On A Roll!** with two
(2) invokes on it. If the Aspect is already active, I instead add two
(2) more free invokes to it. The Aspect is removed at the end of the
scene.
:::

:::description
**Slip Away (-2)**: Because I am excellent at getting away with it and
slipping away unseen, if there is a momentary distraction or opportunity
I may spend a Fate point to immediately exit the scene by means
appropriate to the narrative such as slippling away into a crowd, or
through a hidden door to a secret escape hatch I happened to know about,
or by using a magic item I happened to have, etc. I cannot be pursued in
the current scene.
:::

:::description
**Sublime Expertise (-2)**: Because I am extremely skilled and rarely
blunder, whenever I make a 4dF roll I treat any result of less than 0 as
-1.
:::

:::description
**Thrive Under Pressure**: Because I thrive under pressure, when I spend
a fate point to invoke one of my Aspects to gain a +2 bonus on an action
before I roll, if I succeed with style I get the fate point back
immediately instead of gaining a boost.
:::

:::description
**Universal Linguist**: Because I have a special ability with languages,
I can fluently speak and understand any spoken language I encounter.
:::

:::description
**Wheeler Dealer**: Because I excel at talking my way into and out of
situations and making deals, I gain +2 while Cleverly Roguish in social
situations.
:::

#### No Stranger To The Blade

Though most bards tend to prefer non-violent resolutions, many bards are
nonetheless adept with some manner of weapon, or can otherwise account
for themselves when steel is drawn.

:::description
**Duelist**: Because I am skilled at the art of using weapons such as
thinblades, foils, rapiers, epees, sabres, and stilettos (i.e,
\'dueling\' weapons), I am a surprisingly effective combatant when armed
appropriately. Though my fighting style remains agile and even acrobatic
at times, when armed with an appropriate weapon I can use Focused in
place of Combatives in armed physical conflicts.
:::

:::description
**Forbidding Presence**: Because I present a very intimidating and stern
visage while emanating a frightenting aura, I gain +1 when being Flashy
and attempting to frighten or demoralize.
:::

:::description
**Impressive Reflexes**: Because I have excellent reflexes, I gain +1
while Quickly attacking.
:::

:::description
**Riposte**: Because even my defense is dangerous, whenever I am
Flashily Focused and defend with style against a physical melee attack
while wielding a dueling weapon I may use the boost to inflict a single
point of stress on my attacker, immediately, as a free action.
:::

:::description
**Tumbler**: Because I am excellent at acrobatically flipping around and
tumbling, if I am in a conflict and do nothing in an exchange except
move, I may move an additional zone and I am unobstructed by minor
obstacles that I can tumble around or flip over. If I am in a contest
involving me running away from something or avoiding capture, I gain +1
to overcome while I am Quick.
:::

#### Magically Adept

Some bards are more than merely mundane, having one or more mystical
abilities that mark them out above the common man.

:::description
**Arcane Senses**: Because I have developed my arcane senses to
impressive heights, I may use Arcane instead of Focused to notice or
perceive things and I can sense things that require mystical awareness
to detect.

This stunt requires Arcane +1 or better to use.
:::

:::description
**Heed Me!**: Because I have a magical knack that allows me to augment
my spoken voice with enchanting magics I may use Arcane for social
interactions if I can talk and my target can hear me. I am resisted by
Arcane when I do so. This is a form of mind-affecting magic.

This stunt requires Arcane +1 or better to use.
:::

:::description
**Mage Armor Knack**: **Because I have a minor magical knack, I can
create advantage while Carefully Arcane vs an Average (+1) difficulty to
apply the Aspect Mage Armor** to myself. While this Aspect is active I
gain +2 when defending against physical or damaging magical attacks.
This Aspect may also be invoked to offer additional protection when
defending from physical or magical harm. This Aspect can be overcome and
removed as a Superb (+5) difficulty by those with Arcane +3 or higher.

This stunt requires Arcane +1 or better to use.
:::

:::description
**Secret Signs**: Because I have an unusual mystical talent I sometimes
see signs, portents, and sigils that provide me with information about
the present or near future that I could not possibly know otherwise. I
gain +2 while I am Focused and create advantage when I attempt to
discover or notice some detail, fact, Aspect, or truth about the scene,
or a person or group in it, even if it would not normally be possible
for me to know or detect this information with merely mundane senses.
:::

:::description
**Willful Invisibility**: Because I can turn invisibile at will, if I do
not attack or create advantage in an exchange I may place the
situational Aspect **\'Invisible\'** on myself as a free action that
takes no time before or after my normal action. If I attack or create
advantage while invisible, this Aspect is immediately removed and I
become visibile for at least one (1) exchange before I am able to use
this ability to become invisible again. My innate invisibility can be
temporarily neutralized by those with unusual senses or magic or special
items creating an applicable advantage; the difficulty to do so is
Superb (+5). It can also be overcome and thus removed by some abilities
that explicitly counter invisibility or dispel magic; the difficulty to
do so is Fantastic (+6).
:::

#### Spellcasting

Bard spellcasters might be interested in [Arcanist
Stunts](#arcanist-stunts), [Primordial Stunts](#primordial-stunts), or
[Deific Stunts](#deific-stunts).

As explained in the [Simple Magic Guidelines](#simple-magic-guidelines)
guidelines, Pathfinder Fate Accelerated allows characters with 
**Arcane**, **Divine**, or **Primal** of +3 and higher to cast spells.

If you plan on playing a spellcasting bard, you should familiarize
yourself with the [Simple Magic Guidelines] guidelines at a minimum, and
you might want to glance over various available [simple magic
options](#simple-magic-options) to see if anything catches your
interest.

##### Free Casting vs Prepared Casting

Pathfinder Fate Accelerated allows free casting by default, but some
players might prefer their cleric to be a Prepared Caster; see [prepared
casting](#prepared-casting) for more information.

##### Spellcasting Stunts

You should consult the \[Sorcerer Stunts\], \[Wizard Stunts\], \[Witch
Stunts\], \[Druid Stunts\], or \[Cleric Stunts\], class translation
sections for ideas and a wide selection of relevant arcanist feats.
However, the following feats are simple and possibly appealing to a
mystical dabbler such as a bard.

:::description
**Hedge Arcanist**: Because I practice a more ancient form of Arcane
magic that remains connected to the natural world, while Arcane I can
cast spells that replicate effects that are usually the province of
Primal. Further, I may also add my Primal capability modifier as a bonus
to my roll when I do so.

This stunt requires Primal +1 or better to use.
:::

:::description
**Herbal Lore**: Because I know the secrets of many plants, when I am
Carefully Arcane I may create a potion, poultice, or poison using magics
that are normally the domain of Primal, and I may add my Primal
capability modifier (if any) as a bonus. Additionally, I can identify
mundane poisons, provide simple remedies for headaches and minor mundane
illnesses, embellish prepared food, and other such things when my herbal
lore is relevant.
:::

:::description
**Scroll Scrivener**: Because I have mastered the art of scribing
scrolls, I can be Cleverly Arcane and prepare \'spell completion\' items
as scrolls or similar items for specific spell effects that I can cast.
I can later cast the inscribed spell (using the simple magic system
guidelines) from the item, gaining a bonus in the process. Other
characters with Arcane +1 or better can also use my scrolls. I can also
stockpile unused scrolls, as well as use scrolls inscribed by others.
Unless explicitly denied means and opportunity, I can prepare a number
of new scrolls ready for use equal to my Arcane capability each day.
:::

### Source Material Notes

#### First edition AD&D

Back in the days of first edition AD&D, bards were basically what we
would now think of as a \"prestige class\" for dual classed fighter /
bards with unreasonably high (and randomly rolled!) characteristics
across the board.

Further, when they finally got spell casting abilities their spells were
druidic.

Celtic concepts of the bard as loremaster and mentor to heroes was the
strongest fictional influence.

If you ever actually encountered a bard, they were most likely a higher
leveled and very competent individual who was not to be underestimated
or trifled with. Often they were agent provocateurs, or spies, or in
positions of power as honored advisors to rulers.

#### Second edition AD&D

This edition normalized bards as a standard class, and presented them as
a thief / wizard hybrid with some special sing-songy abilities, bardic
lore, and a broad selection of weapon proficiencies.

Bards still required high stats to play, but not quite as badly as in
1e, and as a base class offering a sort of cherry picked assortment of
the best features of three other classes it wasn\'t a bad way to go.

Further, thanks to the special quirkiness of this edition\'s
asymmetrical experience points per level chart and the fact that bards
used the fastest advancing track in the game (rogues), min maxing the
bard\'s spellcasting to choose spells that got better based upon the
caster\'s level allowed bards to be even more effective spell casters
than an equivalently experienced wizard in certain situations.

And to top it off, some of the \"kits\" offered for bards were also
pretty advantageous. It was a good time to be a bard.

When you met a bard, you were likely dealing with an effective \"gish\"
character with a dangerously broad array of abilities who should not be
underestimated.

#### Third edition D&D

In this edition bards were presented as more of a magical minstrel
know-it-all, emphasizing the bardic performance and lore elements of the
concept.

Casting like sorcerers with a custom spell list of mixed quality (but
perhaps in a nod to the 1e druidic bard, offering healing spells to an
arcane caster), generally oriented towards buffing and team-support
effects, and not really viable as backup martial characters past the
lower levels due to base attack and hitpoint shortfalls.

Further, due to the changes in the skill system which allowed characters
of all classes to be skilled in various things, aside from the wildcard
of their special \"bardic lore\" ability, the skill element of the bard
concept was also devalued.

And changes (for the better!) to multiclassing took away the special
niche bards enjoyed in 2e as a hybrid collection of useful class
features; jokes were famously made (such as Nale vs Elan in Order of the
Stick) about playing a fighter / sorcerer / rogue instead of a bard.

Pathfinder revised the bard a bit, but the basic issues remained.

When you met a bard, you were likely dealing with an underpowered
support character with weird quirks, and often portrayed (rightly or
wrongly) as a buffoon or a fop.

#### Diverging From Source Material

Perhaps more than any other class concept, the source materials\'
conception of the bard has changed quite a bit over the years, with each
new edition of the rules presenting a significantly different take.

The underlying elements of the bard concept have generally included a
martially competent, skilled, secondary spell caster.

Additional themes are a high degree of knowledge (or \"lore\") in a
variety of subjects, and a mystically powerful voice as evinced by
entrancing music or oratory abilities.

The good news is, in Pathfinder Fate Accelerated you are free to express
your character concept however you like, baring GM veto.

Don\'t feel obligated to don a straightjacket of slavish devotion to
source material; you are free to be creative, assign your pluses, and
define your character\'s Aspects and Stunts in a way that realizes
*your* \"bard\" concept.

## The Cavalier

This section provides suggestions and insights into how to translate the
ideas of the Cavalier class from the source material into Pathfinder
Fate Accelerated.

:::flavor
\"Cavaliers tend to marshal forces on the battlefield, using their
mounted talents and challenges to control the flow of the fight. Outside
of battle, cavaliers can be found advancing their cause through
diplomacy and, if needed, subterfuge. The cavalier is no stranger to
courtly intrigue and can hold his own in even the most delicate of
social situations.\"
:::

:::sidebar
#### Sample Iconics

[Syr](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Syr/Syr.aspx)
:::

:::sidebar
#### Starting Archetype Sets

**Paragon**: Combative +4

**Well Drilled**: Combative +3, Focused +1

**Courtier**: Combative +3, Roguish +1
:::

For purposes of Pathfinder Fate Accelerated, the differences between a
fighter and a cavalier boils down to Stunt choices and wording of
Aspects and Troubles to model a code of honor or equivalent to capture a
\"cavalier\" feel.

Therefore, it is recommended that players interested in making a
cavalier type character refer to \[the Fighter} class translation, and
address their character\'s \"knightly order\" via careful selection of
their Stunts and Aspects.

::: {.Example}
[Syr](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Syr/Syr.aspx) is a heavily
armored Knight of the Blue Rose. The cavaliers of the Order of the Blue
Rose dedicate themselves to promoting peace in the lands they roam.
Skilled warriors and adept diplomats, these cavaliers counsel wisdom,
patience, and understanding, but are ever mindful of the need to take up
arms to strike down aggressors, tyrants, or evil usurpers. Although they
believe wholeheartedly in peace as an aim and a final goal, cavaliers of
the Blue Rose are warriors first, and embrace their role as guardians of
those who cannot or will not take up arms to defend themselves.
:::

### Stunts

See [The Fighter](#the-fighter) class translation for a selection of
relevant warrior feats.

The following Stunts might be of interest to a cavalier.

:::description
**Charger**: Because I excel at charging into combat to deliver a
devastating attack, I gain +3 while Forcefully or Quickly Combative to
make melee attacks in a conflict if I first move one or more zones in
the same action to reach my opponent. I cannot split my shifts between
multiple opponents when I do this.
:::

:::description
**Courser**: Because I am so skilled at fighting while mounted, I gain
+2 when I am Quickly Combative and attack from the back of a mount.
:::

:::description
**Inspiring Leadership**: Because I inspire my allies and followers, any
allies who join me in battle gain +1 on all actions they take within a
conflict while being Combative. Allies must be within three (3) zones
and within line of sight of me to benefit from my leadership. This
ability applies for the duration of the conflict even if I am taken out,
as my allies are moved to protect or avenge me.
:::

:::description
**Mounted Strike**: Because I excel at ride-by attacks when mounted,
whenever I am Quickly Combative and attack after moving a zone, if I
succeed with style my mount and I may immediately move 1 zone away as a
free action. If I also choose to reduce the damage I inflict to get a
boost I may use that boost to move an additional zone further away. I
may also choose to spend a Fate point to move an additional zone further
away.
:::

:::description
**Rally Leader**\[:\]{\#ctl00\_Content\_RallyLeader\_Line1} Because I am
able to inspire my allies to regroup and rally, once per scene I can
give a motivating monologue or shout out words of courage and valor to
allow all allies within one (1) zone of me to clear one of their stress
boxes or a Mild consequence.
:::

#### Companions

Cavaliers often have animal companions as mounts or followers such as
squires and henchmen; see the [Stunt options](#stunt-options) section
for details on how to incorporate companions into your character using
Stunts.

:::description
**Minion**: Because **\[describe the reason you have a follower\]**, I
have drawn an assistant into my service.

:::description
###### Minion

**Aspects**

-   Select two.

**Good At**

-   Spread +4 around 1 to 4 skill-like abilities

**Bad At**

-   Spread -4 around 1 to 4 skill-like abilities

**Hits**

-   \[1\]\[1\]
:::
:::

:::description
**Animal Companion (-3)**: Because **\[describe the reason you have an
animal companion\]**, I have attracted a powerful animal companion that
chooses to aid me.

:::description
###### Animal Companion

**Aspects**

-   Select two.

**Good At**

-   Spread +4 around 1 to 4 skill-like abilities

**Bad At**

-   Spread -4 around 1 to 4 skill-like abilities

**Stress**

-   \[1\]\[2\]\[3\]
-   Mild (2)
-   Moderate (4)
:::
:::

## The Cleric

This section provides suggestions and insights into how to translate the
ideas of the Cleric class from the source material into Pathfinder Fate
Accelerated.

:::flavor
\"More than capable of upholding the honor of their deities in battle,
clerics often prove stalwart and capable combatants.

Their true strength lies in their ability to draw upon the power of
their deities, whether to increase their own and their allies\' prowess
in battle, to vex their foes with divine magic, or to lend healing to
companions in need. As their powers are influenced by their faith, all
clerics must focus their worship upon a divine source.

In faith and the miracles of the divine, many find a greater purpose.
Called to serve powers beyond most mortal understanding, all priests
preach wonders and provide for the spiritual needs of their people.
These emissaries of the divine work the will of their deities through
strength of arms and the magic of their gods.

Devoted to the tenets of the religions and philosophies that inspire
them, these ecclesiastics quest to spread the knowledge and influence of
their faith. Yet while they might share similar abilities, clerics prove
as different from one another as the divinities they serve.

The ways of the cleric are varied, yet all who tread these paths walk
with the mightiest of allies and bear the arms of the gods themselves.\"
:::

:::sidebar
#### Sample Iconics

[Kurek](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Kurek/Kurek.aspx),
[Nikade](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Nikade/Nikade.aspx),
[Paryl](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Paryl/Paryl.aspx),
[Uraska](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Uraska/Uraska.aspx),
[Vadok](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Vadok/Vadok.aspx)
:::

:::sidebar
#### Starting Archetype Sets

**Fervent**: Divine +4

**Devout**: Divine +3, Combative +1

**Militant**: Divine +2, Combative +2
:::

### Archetype Considerations

The only two Archetypes a cleric has to concern themselves with are
**Divine** and **Combatives**.

**Divine** +3 allows unrestricted spell casting using the [simple magic
guIdeliNes](#simple-magic-guidelines), which you should read first if
you are serious about playing a spellcaster. Also, some [sample
spells](#sample-spells) are available.

Thus if you want your starting cleric to be a full caster starting out
but still be able to serve as a secondary combatant (matching the source
material), you should consider the Devout set of Starting Archetypes,
plus one or two combat related Stunts to shore up their \"warrior\"
facet.

Starting clerics who prefer to accentuate their ability to fight should
consider the Militant set of Starting Archetypes, plus one or two divine
related Stunts to shore up their \"holy\" facet.

It\'s also possible to splash a Archetype other than **Combative** for
priests of some divine patrons.

For instance the priest of a god of thieves might go **Divine** &
**Roguish**, while the priest of a god of strength and athleticism might
go **Divine** & **Focused** and the priest of a god of magic might go
**Divine** & **Arcane**.

::: {.Example}
[Kurek](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Kurek/Kurek.aspx) is a
priest of the Dwarven god Trudd the Mighty, strongest of the Dwarven
pantheon. Kurek is blessed by Trudd, and entered the priesthood young.
He has since progressed far and seeks to spread his god\'s worship
amongst the Dwarves of far Varisia.
:::

Finally, there\'s nothing preventing you from making a cleric that goes
all in on the holiness facet, with **Divine** +4, such as demonstrated
by the Fervent set of Starting Archetypes.

::: {.Example}
[Uraska](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Uraska/Uraska.aspx) is
a strange man of progressing years, well favored in the service of
Nethys and learned in the ways of mysticism. Despite his progressed
years and appearance as a harmless mendicant priest, Uraska commands
powerful divine forces granted to him by the literal god of Magic and
Destruction; he is not to be trifled with.
:::

##### Nature Priests

Nature priests of gods like **Erastil** and **Gozreh** are an odd breed,
as in D&D the difference between druids and priests who worship gods
with nature related portfolios has always been an area where the class
system shows its rough edges. But in Pathfinder Fate Accelerated terms a
priest of a nature god can go **Divine** +1, **Primal** +3, which
abstracts away from the problem.

This will allow your character to have appropriate levels of competence
in natural settings. If you don\'t want your character\'s casting to
suffer from having split Archetypes, you might also take a Stunt similar
to **Nature Priest** but it isn\'t required.

:::description
**Nature Priest**: Because I worship a nature deity I am in tune with
both divine and primal forces. When using Primal to work magic I may add
my Divine capability as a bonus.
:::

Note that while the concept of a vague \"green faith\" also exists in
the source material **Primal** amply covers that idea on its own; 
**Divine** is not necessary.

::: {.Example}
[Vadok](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Vadok/Vadok.aspx) is a
simple, earnest man dedicated to the service of the nature god
**Erastil**, Old Deadeye. Also a skilled archer and accompanied by a
powerful divinely invested puma named Aadat, Vadok is a erstwhile
defender of common rustic folk and the ideal of man living in harmony
with nature.
:::

::: {.Example}
[Nikade](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Nikade/Nikade.aspx) is
a confident and tempestuous young man dedicated to the service of the
volatile nature god **Gozreh**, the master of Wind and Wave. Armed with
a divinely invested harpoon, and capable of bending the very weather to
his will when necessary, Nikade is a powerful exponent of his
unpredictable patron\'s interests in the material world.
:::

### Approach Considerations

A cleric\'s choice of Approaches will usually be influenced by their
patron deity and the nature of their priesthood.

But stereotypically clerics are often **Careful** under ordinary
circumstances, **Forceful** when smiting those who oppose their
religion\'s goals, and **Flashy** when spouting litanies, prayers, and
calls for divine aid.

### What Kind Of Cleric, Exactly?

Generally speaking, when defining a character in Pathfinder Fate
Accelerated that you envision falling into the \"cleric\" category, you
might start out by asking yourself the following questions:

1.  What deity does my cleric serve?
2.  What role do I want my cleric to fill?
3.  Does my cleric feel that they are only responsible for their own
    actions and have the ability to coexist with others who do not share
    their views, or do they hold those around them to the same code of
    conduct the cleric adheres to and persecute those who do not follow
    it?
4.  Does my cleric focus more on spellcasting or on other abilities?

#### Whom Do You Serve?

The first question is probably the most important for framing the nature
of your character. You can use the choice of divine patron to guide your
decisions about your character\'s Aspects and Stunts, and to inform your
portrayal.

#### Role?

Unlike some of the other class concepts coming from the source material,
the cleric can be individualized to fill a variety of roles. Similarly,
when you make a cleric character in Pathfinder Fate Accelerated, you get
to decide what role you want your cleric to attempt to fill.

You might intend for your cleric to be a front line combatant, helping a
group to succeed in conflicts. Or perhaps you want to play a \"face\" or
leader cleric who takes point in social encounters. Or you might want
your cleric to be a problem-solver or \"support\" character who is
either specialized to address a particular niche or generalized to have
a broad range of \"utility\" allowing them to adapt to emerging
challenges that the group might face in their adventures. And of course,
your cleric might attempt to fill more than one role or not be
intentionally designed to fit any particular role as you prefer.

#### Contemplative or Evangelist?

Some clerics are portrayed as being inwardly focused, responsible for
their own deeds and conduct. This sort of cleric can generally get along
with others and cooperate towards a common goal with people of different
viewpoints, at least to some extent. This is conducive to party dynamics
and getting things done. However, it can also be quite dull.

Other clerics are portrayed as being outwardly focused, intent on
imposing the worship of their religion and the tenets of their patron
upon the world. This sort of cleric often has a difficult time working
and playing well with others, and often finds themselves embroiled in
some kind of strife due to their evangelical overtures and intolerance
for other beliefs. This can make for some great drama, but on the other
hand it can also get quite stale and annoying.

Regardless of where your cleric is at on that spectrum, thinking about
it now will guide your choice of High Concept and Trouble. It will also
indicate if you plan to portray the character in an antagonistic or
cooperative manner relative to other player characters.

#### Dedicated Caster or All-Arounder?

If you intend for your cleric to be a dedicated caster of Divine spells,
this will guide your selection of Archetype bonuses and possibly of one
or more Stunts.

However if you want your character to have some of the stereotypical
features of clerics in the source material, such as Channel Energy or
Turn Undead, or you want to have a signature ability relevant to your
cleric\'s patron deity, you\'ll need to allocate one or more Stunt slots
to them.

::: {.Example}
[Paryl](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Paryl/Paryl.aspx) is a
wandering priest greatly favored by Desna, goddess of Luck, Stars,
Travel, and Dreams. On an endless journey, Paryl aids those met along
the road, but his usually kind and generous nature turns hard and
merciless when dealing with bandits or any who would interfere with the
sanctity of traveling.
:::

### Stunts

Cleric characters might find the following Stunt categories of interest:
[Deific Stunts](#deific-stunts), [Warrior Stunts](#warrior-stunts),
[Durability Stunts](#durability-stunts)a, [Command
Stunts](#command-stunts).

The following Stunts are offered as samples that might be relevant for
some clerics.

However, the best Stunts are those that are tailor made to fit your
concept, so don\'t hesitate to come up with your own or work with your
GM to define something that is \"just right\" for your character.

See the [Stunt options](#stunt-options) section for ideas on how to do
this.

:::sidebar
#### Faith Worthiness

Clerics that are granted abilities by their patrons can lose access to
those abilities if they do something unworthy of their faith; thus such
Stunts typically include language to that effect.

This is left to the GM\'s discretion, but it isn\'t intended to create
antagonistic situations. Ultimately a player should have a large measure
of control over their character\'s story; any failings of faith should
be regarded as a roleplaying opportunity.
:::

#### Holy Holy

Clerics are invested with divine power by their patron deities, though
the nature of such favor varies from deity to deity, or even from
individual to individual.

:::description
**Detect Evil**: Because I am sensitive to ethical and moral
propensities, I am able to sense strong concentrations of immorality and
evilness in individuals, objects, and areas from six (6) zones away even
if the source in not detectable to my other senses. Additionally, I gain
+2 to notice relevant concentrations of evil while Focused.
:::

:::description
**Divine Aegis**: Because my patron deity protects me I may use Divine
to defend against non-Divine magical and unusual attacks without needing
to first create an advantage to invoke, unless I have recently done
something unworthy of my faith.
:::

:::description
**Divine Favor**: Because I am favored by my patron deity, I may add my
Divine capability as a bonus to defend against physical attacks, unless
I have recently done something unworthy of my faith.
:::

:::description
**Divine Renewal**: Because I am favored by my patron deity, when I am
Carefully Divine I may pray for aid to clear a stress box or a Mild
Consequence, or to downgrade a Moderate or Severe Consequence, by
overcoming a difficulty equal to the stress box\'s or Consequence\'s
numerical value. This only works on my own stress and Consequences, not
that of others. If I fail to overcome the difficulty I may not attempt
to clear the same stress box or heal the same Consequence again; I must
wait for it to clear by other means. I cannot use this ability if I have
recently done something unworthy of my faith
:::

:::description
**Favored Follower**: Because I am favored by my patron deity, once per
scene when I spend a fate point to get a reroll I may proceed as if I
had rolled +2 on the dice instead of rolling a second time. I may not
use this ability if I have recently done something unworthy of my faith.
:::

:::description
**Fervent Prayer**: Because my faith is strong, I am sometimes
especially blessed by my god. I may spend a Fate point to gain +2 Divine
on one (1) action and pray for blessings appropriate to that level of
Divine capability. I may not use this ability if I have recently done
something unworthy of my faith.
:::

:::description
**Shield of Faith**: Because I am favored by my patron deity, I may add
my Divine capability as a bonus to defend against indirect attacks such
as poisons and strange abilities and magic, unless I have recently done
something unworthy of my faith.
:::

:::description
**True Seeing**: Because my patron diety grants me awareness, my powers
of observation are divinely enhanced; I may use Divine instead of
Focused to notice or perceive things, and I can sense things that
require mystical awareness to detect.
:::

#### Defender Of The Faith

Many clerics are martially capable, able to serve as defenders of their
faith and the faithful. Some rely purely on skill, while others benefit
from blessings that aid them in battle.

:::description
**Combative Aegis**: Because I have developed my defensive form to a
high degree of skill, when I am Carefully Combative and appropriately
equipped, if someone else in my zone is physically attacked I may defend
on their behalf. However I take any shifts of damage that get past my
defenses, rather than the intended target.
:::

:::description
**Damage Reduction**: Because I am more durable than normal, I reduce by
one (1) all stress inflicted on me by physical and magical attacks.
:::

:::description
**Divine Weapon (-2)**: Because I am favored by my patron deity, I have
been graced with a divinely empowered weapon. If I have recently done
something unworthy of my faith, the weapon loses its special abilities
until I have atoned.

:::description
###### Divine Weapon

**Aspects**

-   Divine Blade
-   Aura Of Protection

**Good At**

-   Blocking (+2)
-   Cutting (+2)

**Bad At**

-   Going Unnoticed (-2)

**Stress**:

-   \[1\]\[2\]\[3\]
-   Mild (2)

See \[Special Items\] for details.

This item requires Divine +2 or better to use.
:::
:::

:::description
**Forbidding Presence**: Because I present a very intimidating and stern
visage while emanating a frightenting aura, I gain +1 when being Flashy
and attempting to frighten or demoralize.
:::

:::description
**Heavy Armor Training**: Because I have trained to wear heavy armor
extensively, I gain +1 to Combatives to defend when I am heavily
armored.
:::

:::description
**Holy Hand Grenades**: Because my patron favors me, I am able to craft
special reliquaries containing holy power that are released upon impact
when thrown, inflicting harm on evil outsiders, undead, and other
unnatural creatures nearby. I cannot use this ability if I have recently
done something unworthy of my faith.

When I am Quickly Focused I gain +1 to throw a holy hand grenade into my
zone or an adjacent zone, generally against an Average (+1) difficulty.

If I am successful, my holy hand grenade explodes and inflicts a number
of shifts of damage equal to my (Careful + Divine) against every
eligible target in the zone without splitting shifts between them.
Malign outsiders (such as demons, devils, daemons, and proteans),
undead, and other similar unnatural creatures are considered to be
eligible for this effect.

For a given session I can carry around and use a number of holy hand
grenades equal to my (Careful + Divine). Other people can not use my
holy hand grenades.

This stunt requires Divine +1 or better to use.
:::

:::description
**Indomitable**: Because I refuse to give in and I always vigorously
protect myself, I get +1 when I am Forceful and defend if I am aware
that I am in danger.
:::

:::description
**Inspiring Leadership**: Because I inspire my allies and followers, any
allies who join me in battle gain +1 on all actions they take within a
conflict while being Combative. Allies must be within three (3) zones
and within line of sight of me to benefit from my leadership. This
ability applies for the duration of the conflict even if I am taken out,
as my allies are moved to protect or avenge me.
:::

:::description
**Push Beyond The Edge**: Because I fight to the bitter end no matter
what the cost, at any time as a non action if my Severe consequence is
currently clear I may choose to either worsen my Moderate consequence
(if any) to a Severe consequence or take a new Severe consequence
**Pushed Myself Too Far** to clear my Mild Consequences and all my
Stress boxes.
:::

:::description
**Rally Leader**\[:\]{\#ctl00\_Content\_RallyLeader\_Line1} Because I am
able to inspire my allies to regroup and rally, once per scene I can
give a motivating monologue or shout out words of courage and valor to
allow all allies within one (1) zone of me to clear one of their stress
boxes or a Mild consequence.
:::

:::description
**Resilience**: Because of my impressive resilience, once per session if
I would take a Consequence I may instead spend a Fate point.
:::

:::description
**Smite**: Because I have been granted the ability to smite those who
stand against me by my patron deity, I gain +1 while Combative to strike
down a foe within my zone whose nature is anathemic to my patron deity;
further if my attack inflicts a consequence I gain an additional free
invoke on it.
:::

:::description
**Smite The Unworthy**: Because I am favored by my patron deity, when I
am being Combative I may add my Divine capability to attack opponents
who I know to be beyond redemption, unless I have recently done
something unworthy of my faith.
:::

:::description
**Weapon Mastery (-3)**: Because I have spent many years mastering a
type of weapon, I gain +1 to Combatives when I attack, defend, create
advantage, or overcome while using any weapon of that type.
:::

#### Suffer Not The Undead

Some clerics of faiths that find the Undead to be particularly offensive
abominations are graced with the ability to destroy or turn any Undead
they may encounter.

:::description
**Destroy Undead**: Because I am particularly good at destroying lesser
undead, while Flashily Divine I may overcome to destroy an Undead mook
in my zone or an adjacent zone; the difficulty is equal to the number of
hits the mook has remaining. This does work on mobs of nameless Undead
mooks, but it does not work on significant NPC Undead that have
consequences.
:::

:::description
**Turn Undead**: When I am Divine and attack I may target all Undead in
my zone or in an adjacent zone without having to split my shifts between
them.
:::

:::description
**Turn Undead (-2)**: When I am Divine and attack I may target all
Undead in my zone and all adjacent zones without having to split my
shifts between them.
:::

:::sidebar
#### Option: Prepared Casting

Pathfinder Fate Accelerated allows free casting by default, but some
players might prefer their cleric to be a Prepared Caster; see [prepared
casting](#prepared-casting) and [divine prepared
caster](#divine-prepared-caster) for more information.
:::

### Source Material Notes

#### Support / Utility

The source material offers clerics as full casting support characters
with an array of options including buffing, debuffing, status effect
removal, and healing.

#### Secondary Tank / Striker

Additionally, a cleric can serve as a secondary tank and / or a
secondary striker, and choice of deity and domains affords a good level
of individualization.

#### Alignment / Code of Conduct

The primary downside of the cleric in the source material is alignment
restrictions and a vague requirement to not fall from the faith of their
chosen deity.

Generally this isn\'t as severe as a paladin\'s alignment and code of
conduct, but it does impose some restrictions on a cleric\'s freedom of
expression.

#### Diverging From Source Material

The cleric is a solid and flexible class in the source material, but
Pathfinder Fate Accelerated offers even more flexibility to personalize
your cleric to make a character that is as distinctive as they are
capable.

Pathfinder Fate Accelerated joyfully dispenses with the alignment
concept altogether; \"goodness\" and \"evilness\" and \"lawfulness\" and
etc. can be a thing, but it is based upon interpretation of Aspects and
deeds.

If you want to play a \"lawful good\" character and that means something
to you personally, so be it.

Pick your character\'s High Concept, Trouble, and Aspects appropriately
to further that ideal and then portray your character accordingly.

But there\'s no mechanical impact other than what is ordinarily
available in Fate Accelerated.

Feel free to personalize your cleric to have abilities particularly
suited to their deity\'s focus and fluff.

This will not only make your character more distinctive and memorable,
it will also make the character\'s choice of deity matter more to the
story.

The only limiter is whether the group or GM wants to maintain the
arbitrary restrictions of the source material or not.

As a player interested in expressing their creativity you should first
check with your GM to determine what they will and wont allow.

## The Druid

This section provides suggestions and insights into how to translate the
ideas of the Druid class from the source material into Pathfinder Fate
Accelerated.

:::flavor
\"While some druids might keep to the fringe of battle, allowing
companions and summoned creatures to fight while they confound foes with
the powers of nature, others transform into deadly beasts and savagely
wade into combat. Druids worship personifications of elemental forces,
natural powers, nature itself, spirits, animalistic demigods, or even
specific awe-inspiring natural wonders.

Within the purity of the elements and the order of the wilds lingers a
power beyond the marvels of civilization. Furtive yet undeniable, these
primal magics are guarded over by servants of philosophical balance
known as druids. Allies to beasts and manipulators of nature, these
often misunderstood protectors of the wild strive to shield their lands
from all who threaten them.

Rewarded for their devotion with incredible powers, druids gain
unparalleled shape-shifting abilities, the companionship of mighty
beasts, and the power to call upon nature\'s wrath. The mightiest temper
powers akin to storms, earthquakes, and volcanoes with primeval wisdom
long abandoned and forgotten by civilization.\"
:::

:::sidebar
#### Sample Iconics

[Iasa](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Iasa/Iasa.aspx),
[Lorisa](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Lorisa/Lorisa.aspx),
[Nevaren](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Nevaren/Nevaren.aspx)
:::

:::sidebar
#### Starting Archetype Sets

**Primordial**: Primal +4

**Untamed**: Primal +3, Focused +1
:::

### Archetype Considerations

The only Archetype a druid has to concern themselves with is **Primal**
and everything else is optional.

To be considered a druid (and not some other hybrid concept), a
character should start with at least **Primal** +3, which allows
unrestricted spell casting using the [simple magic
guIdeliNes](#simple-magic-guidelines), which you should read first if
you are serious about playing a spellcaster. Also, write-ups for [sample
spells](#sample-spells) are available.

For a standard starting character, this leaves only the decision of
where to put the final +1.

A hyper-specialized, dedicated druid will go all in on **Primal** +4,
but putting a +1 into one of the other Archetypes goes a long way
towards suggesting a more interesting background for the character. 
**Focused** is probably the most common secondary Archetype splash for
druids.

**Focused** +1 is an excellent choice for a druid who is sharp of wit,
physically fit, perceptive, and quick on their toes.

**Combative** +1 is a good choice for a druid that prefers to use
weapons rather than spells or shapeshifted teeth and claws to inflict
harm.

In D&D it is kind of a thing that druids tend to use scimitars, sickles,
scythes\...weapons with s\'s and c\'s in the name essentially; however
you are free to ignore this trope if you like.

**Roguish** +1 is an unusual choice as there isn\'t much synergy between
**Roguish** and **Primal**. However, there is the idea of a \"urban
druid\" in the source material, and **Roguish** +1 and a Stunt or two
can model that idea.

**Arcane** +1 would be an extremely odd choice, most likely taken to
anchor an unusual background concept. On the other hand, if you want to
play a arcanist with a nature theme you might go the other way and
consider something like a [sorcerer with the verdant
bloodline](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Guidelines/Classes/Sorcerer.aspx#Verdant%20Bloodline).

**Divine** +1 is a complicated choice.

Nature priests of gods like **Erastil** and **Gozreh** are an odd breed,
as in D&D the difference between druids and priests who worship gods
with nature related portfolios has always been an area where the class
system shows its rough edges. But in Pathfinder Fate Accelerated terms a
priest of a nature god can go **Divine** +1, **Primal** +3, which
abstracts away from the problem.

This will allow your character to have appropriate levels of competence
in natural settings. If you don\'t want your character\'s casting to
suffer from having split Archetypes, you might also take a Stunt similar
to **Nature Priest** but it isn\'t required.

:::description
**Nature Priest**: Because I worship a nature deity I am in tune with
both divine and primal forces. When using Primal to work magic I may add
my Divine capability as a bonus.
:::

Note that while the concept of a vague \"green faith\" also exists in
the source material **Primal** amply covers that idea on its own; 
**Divine** is not necessary.

::: {.Example}
[Vadok](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Vadok/Vadok.aspx) is a
simple, earnest man dedicated to the service of the nature god
**Erastil**, Old Deadeye. Also a skilled archer and accompanied by a
powerful divinely invested puma named Aadat, Vadok is a erstwhile
defender of common rustic folk and the ideal of man living in harmony
with nature.
:::

::: {.Example}
[Nikade](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Nikade/Nikade.aspx) is
a confident and tempestuous young man dedicated to the service of the
volatile nature god **Gozreh**, the master of Wind and Wave. Armed with
a divinely invested harpoon, and capable of bending the very weather to
his will when necessary, Nikade is a powerful exponent of his
unpredictable patron\'s interests in the material world.
:::

### Approach Considerations

Druids are rarely **Forceful** or **Flashy**. Similarly, **Quick**
is not a trait generally associated with druids, who tend towards
ruminating, pondering, and waiting for auspicious moments to do things.

Druids are very often **Careful** in their wisdom, and mysteriously
**Sneaky** when it comes to keeping secrets, tending hidden lore,
reading forebodding signs, as well as more prosaically avoiding notice
while moving around in the wildlands.

Many druids know a great deal about a lot of things and are **Clever**
in their sagacity and disciplined thinking.

### What Kind Of Druid, Exactly?

Generally speaking, when defining a character in Pathfinder Fate
Accelerated that you envision falling into the \"druid\" category, you
might start out by asking yourself the following questions:

1.  What form does my nature worship take; the \"green faith\", animism,
    totemism, spiritualism, or something else?
2.  Is maintaining balance between nature and civilization or between
    more metaphysical concepts of good, evil, law, and chaos an
    important facet of my druid?
3.  Is changing forms into one or more animals an important facet of my
    druid?
4.  Is my druid accompanied on their adventures by one or more
    exceptional animal companions?

:::sidebar
#### Elements, Hierarchy, Balance

Some older versions of D&D presented druids as having a strong
connection with the **Elemental Planes** of Air, Earth, Fire, Water.

Also, some materials presented the concept of circles of druids with a
strict hierarchical leadership working behind a veil of mystery to
maintain the \"natural order\" and \"balance\" or neutrality between the
moral and ethical poles.

Some players might want to incorporate one or both of these themes into
their druid concepts.
:::

#### What Kind Of Nature Worship?

Determining your characters particular relationship with nature, their
world view, and their belief system is probably the most important
decision you will make during character creation.

Answering this question should impact your High Concept and probably
your Trouble, at the very least, and might help inform your selection of
other abilities.

#### Maintaining A Balance?

In some versions of the source material druids actively concern
themselves with maintaining some kind of \"balance\".

In some cases this is presented as the mundane balancing between
unsullied nature and encroaching civilization. In other cases it is
presented as a metaphysical balancing act between the moral and ethical
poles of the D&D alignment system and aligned material plane and
extra-planar agents and exponents.

Deciding if you want to incorporate such ideas into your character will
help guide your choice of Aspects, possibly one or more Stunts, and the
portrayal of your druid character.

::: {.Example}
[Iasa](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Iasa/Iasa.aspx) is an
ancient and aloof Elven deep wood druid, profoundly attuned to the
natural order and his people\'s long history of living in balance with
nature. Accompanied by his loyal ally, the kingly eagle Aarea, Iasa
pursues some mysterious thread of fate.

Currently he seeks an ancient elven artifact, but what ultimate goal he
labors towards remains a secret, like so many other mysteries Iasa
chooses not to share.
:::

#### Shapeshifter?

If you want to incoporate changing into animal forms into your concept
you\'ll need to reserve Stunt slots for a Stunt like Wild Shape. Due to
the high opportunity cost involved, this decision will have a big impact
on the final disposition of your character.

An alternative to dedicating Stunt slots to such an ability is to rely
on spell casting rather than Stunts to accomplish shapeshifting. Though
it will be slower and more awkward during play due to the loss of action
efficiency caused by having to use Create Advantage frequently, from a
character design standpoint there is no real opportunity cost involved
if you go this route.

::: {.Example}
[Lorisa](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Lorisa/Lorisa.aspx) is
a hardened near-savage Kellid from far Iobaria, gifted with the speech
of beasts, and the ability to take on the forms of many animals.

She\'s as fearsome as an aggravated grizzly, and those who are wise
avoid her clawed ire.
:::

#### Animal Companions?

If you intend to incorporate one or more animal companions into your
concept, you\'ll need to allocate one or more Stunt slots to it.

If you do have an animal companion it might be a specific mighty beast
who is a significant NPC in their own right and an important part of
your character, or it might just be the ability to summon or control
indigenous mundane animals as needed.

### Stunts

Druid characters might find the following Stunt categories of interest:
[Primordial Stunts](#primordial-stunts), [Warrior
Stunts](#warrior-stunts), [Elemental Stunts](#elemental-stunts),
[Durability Stunts](#durability-stunts).

The following Stunts are offered as samples that might be relevant for
some druids. However, the best Stunts are those that are tailor made to
fit your concept, so don\'t hesitate to come up with your own or work
with your GM to define something that is \"just right\" for your
character. See the [Stunt options](#stunt-options) section for ideas on
how to do this.

#### Uncanny Animystic

Most druids are deeply in touch with the natural world, and often have
uncanny abilities that are more than mundane such as the ability to grow
gills, sense danger, command undergrowth to ensnare the unwary, conjure
an elemental weapons, or assume the forms of various animals.

:::description
**Amphibious Swimmer**: Because I am amphibious, I may add my Primal
capability bonus when I am Focused while swimming. Additionally, while
swimming underwater I can hold my breath for an entire scene before
having to come up for air.
:::

:::description
**Blade Of Fire (-3)**: Because of my elemental affinity I can conjure a
flaming magical sword at will; I gain +1 to attack and defend and can
use Primal in place of Combatives while wielding it. If I get a boost
while attacking or defending with it, I may upgrade the boost to apply
the Aspect On **Fire!** with two (2) invokes on it to the opponent I am
engaged with.
:::

:::description
**Danger Sense**: Because I am unusually alert and perceptive I gain +3
while Quickly Focused to notice things that are dangerous, fast moving,
or pose an imminent threat to my safety.
:::

:::description
**Entangling Undergrowth**: Because I am a master of natural magics,
when I am in a rural area with vegetation, while I am Carefully Primal I
may attempt to overcome a Great (+4) difficulty to cause the undergrowth
in my zone or an adjacent zone to animate and wrap itself around and
entangle all targets. See the Entangling Undergrowth profile for
details. I am immune to this effect.

:::description
###### Entangling Undergrowth
:::

**Aspects**

-   Animated Undergrowth
-   Creeping Vines

**Good At**

-   Entangling (+5)

**Limitation**

-   An immobile construct anchored to its zone.

**Hits**

-   \[1\]\[1\]\[1\]\[1\]\[1\]
:::

:::description
**Hammer Of Stone (-3)**: Because of my elemental affinity I can conjure
a fearsome stone hammer at will; I gain +1 to attack and defend and can
use Primal in place of Combatives while wielding it. If I get a boost
while attacking or defending with it, I may upgrade the boost to apply
the Aspect **Stunned!** with two (2) invokes on it to the opponent I am
engaged with.
:::

:::description
**Natural Weapons**: Because I have natural weapons and am skilled in
their use, I may use Focused instead of Combative when my natural
weapons are relevant. In situations where it matters I can choose to be
treated as attacking barehanded or attacking with a weapon, whichever
benefits me more in the situation. Finally, though I can be
inconvenienced and my natural weapons can be fouled or restrained, being
disarmed is generally off the table for me.
:::

:::description
**Pass Without Trace**: Because of my mastery of the natural world, I
gain +1 when I am Sneakily Primal while in the wildlands, I am
unobstructed by undergrowth, and if I take a full move I may move three
zones instead of two. Finally, tracking me in wildland areas is very
difficult; those attempting it must overcome a difficulty equal to my
**((Sneaky + Primal) \* 2)**.
:::

:::description
**Wild Shape (-2)**:

Because I have the ability to change into the form of any normal animal
of my choice, I may spend a Fate point to temporarily assume an animal
form. My trappings magically change with me and are unavailable until I
return to my normal form.

When I change forms I move all of my Approach bonuses to a disposition
relevant to the animal form I am assuming, and I move all of my
Archetype bonuses to Focused (leaving all of my other Archetypes at +0).
This lasts for an entire scene unless I choose to return to normal,
which ends the effect. Additionally, I may spend another Fate point to
assume a different animal\'s form, and I do not have to first change
back to normal.

When I change forms I gain an additional Aspect named for the animal
form I have assumed which I can invoke when my current animal form is
relevant, and which can be compelled whenever my animal form or lack of
humanoid anatomy might inconvenience me.

If the animal form I change into has natural weapons I may use Focused
in place of Combatives while in a physical conflict.

If the animal form I change into has an unusual form of movement, such
as the flight of a bird, the running of a wolf, or the swimming of a
shark then I gain that mode of movement while I am in that form as well,
at the GM\'s discretion.

If the animal form I change into has an unusual or extra keen sense,
such as the low light vision of a cat, the olfactory senses of a canine,
or the echolocation of a bat then I gain that sense while I am in that
form as well, at the GM\'s discretion.

This stunt requires Primal +1 or better to use.
:::

#### Durable Survivor

Many druids are unusually resilient survivors, capable of living through
incredible trauma and harsh conditions.

:::description
**Immune To Acid**: Because I am immune to acid, I am unaffected by any
malign effect that relies on acid.
:::

:::description
**Immune To Cold**: Because I am immune to cold, I am unaffected by any
malign effect that relies on cold.
:::

:::description
**Immune To Fire**: Because I am immune to fire, I am unaffected by any
malign effect that relies on fire.
:::

:::description
**Immune To Electricity**: Because I am immune to electricity, I am
unaffected by any malign effect that relies on electricity.
:::

:::description
**Immune To Mind-Affecting**: Because I am immune to mind-affecting
abilities, I am unaffected by any malign effect that relies on mental
coersion or disorientation.
:::

:::description
**Immune To Poison**: Because I am immune to poison, I am unaffected by
any malign effect that relies on poison.
:::

:::description
**Living Off The Land**: Because I am adept at surviving off of what
nature offers me, I am always able to find enough food and water to keep
myself and a couple of other people or animals healthy while in
wildlands and rural areas (i.e. above ground and not near a city or
town). Additionally if I\'ve had at least half a day to become familiar
with the terrain in a specific area of wilderness I gain +1 on all
actions while being Primal. How large the area of wilderness might be is
left to the GM\'s discretion, but it should be at least five square
miles.
:::

:::description
**Primal Reduction**: Because I am significantly more rugged, robust,
and survivable due to my deep connection with primal forces, I reduce by
one (1) all physical stress inflicted on me, and I reduce by two (2) all
environmental stress inflicted on me.
:::

:::description
**Primal Resistance**: Because my primal nature and elemental affinity
protects me, I may use Primal to defend against non-Primal magical
attacks without needing to first create an advantage to invoke.
:::

:::description
**Resilience**: Because of my impressive resilience, once per session if
I would take a Consequence I may instead spend a Fate point.
:::

#### Primal Hunter

Many druids are masters of the natural world, supreme trackers and
hunters, canny in their instincts, and feral in their ferocity.

:::description
**Alertness**: Because I am unusually alert and perceptive I gain +2
while Focused to notice things.
:::

:::description
**Ambusher**: Because I am great at setting up ambushes, I gain +1 when
I Sneakily set up an ambush or create a related advantage.
:::

:::description
**Foe Bane**: Because I have a favored enemy Race, when I succesfully
attack a target of that Race I inflict +2 shifts of extra stress.
Additionally, if my attack results in a tie I may use the boost to
inflict a single point of stress on the defender, immediately, as a free
action.
:::

:::description
**Hunting Archer**: Because I am a master archer and hunter, I may use
Primal instead of Combative to attack with any kind of bow and arrow.
:::

:::description
**Pounce!**: Because I excel at leaping into combat in a startling burst
of aggression, I gain +4 on my first attack in a conflict if I act first
and can charge, lunge at, or pounce upon an opponent.
:::

:::description
**Primal Pugilist**: Because I am able to fight with my natural weapons
and with feral intensity, I may use Primal instead of Focused when
fighting barehanded or grappling.
:::

:::description
**Stalking Hunter**: Because I am so good at stalking, hunting, and
pouncing upon prey unnoticed, I get +2 when I am Sneakily Primal and
create advantage or overcome challenges to set up and execute ambushes
while in wildlands.
:::

:::description
**Strider**: Because I am fleet of foot and able to move quickly, if I
am in a conflict and do nothing in an exchange except move, I may move
an extra zone and I am unobstructed by foot hazards of less than knee
height. If I am in a contest involving me walking rapidly or running, I
gain +1 to overcome while I am Quick.
:::

:::description
**Swamp Fighter**: Because I am so adept at fighting within swampy areas
and using my environment effectively, I may add Primal as a bonus when I
am Combative in swamps and marshlands.
:::

:::description
**Swamp Stride**: Because of my mastery of the natural world, I gain +1
when I am Sneakily Primal while in swamps and marshlands, I am
unobstructed by undergrowth and areas of water, and if I take a full
move I may move three zones instead of two. Finally, tracking me in
swampy areas is very difficult; those attempting it must overcome a
difficulty equal to my **((Sneaky + Primal) \* 3)**.
:::

:::description
**Tracker**: Because I am so good at tracking a quary, I get +2 when I
am Carefully Primal and create advantage or overcome challenges related
to tracking things down in wilderness settings.
:::

:::description
**Urban Jungle**: Because I have mastered the art of fading away,
blending in, and avoiding notice even in urban areas among people, I can
use Primal instead of Roguish to create advantage and overcome when
attempting to avoid being noticed in civilized areas (Primal is already
usable for this in rural, wildland areas).
:::

:::description
**Wilderness Runner**: Because I am so swift and able to run for hours,
I may add my Primal capability bonus when I am Focused while running in
wildlands.
:::

:::description
**Wilderness Warrior**: Because I am so adept at stalking prey and
hunting in the wilderness, I may use Primal instead of Combative to
attack when I am in the wilderness.
:::

#### Companions

Druids often have animal companions; see the [Stunt
options](#stunt-options) section for details on how to incorporate
companions into your character using Stunts.

:::description
**Animal Companion (-3)**: Because **\[describe the reason you have an
animal companion\]**, I have attracted a powerful animal companion that
chooses to aid me.

:::description
###### Animal Companion

**Aspects**

-   Select two.

**Good At**

-   Spread +4 around 1 to 4 skill-like abilities

**Bad At**

-   Spread -4 around 1 to 4 skill-like abilities

**Stress**

-   \[1\]\[2\]\[3\]
-   Mild (2)
-   Moderate (4)
:::
:::

The ability to share the senses of an animal companion can be useful.

:::description
**Companion\'s Senses**: Because I share a mystical bond with my animal
companion, I may spend a Fate point to share their senses for a scene at
a range of a few dozen miles. This allows me to witness events through
the senses of my companion as if I were present. This can be detected by
others with appropriate senses as a Quick + Primal overcome action vs a
Fantastic (+6) difficulty.
:::

:::sidebar
#### Option: Prepared Casting

Pathfinder Fate Accelerated allows free casting by default, but some
players might prefer their cleric to be a Prepared Caster; see [prepared
casting](#prepared-casting) and [primal prepared
caster](#primal-prepared-caster) for more information.
:::

### Source Material Notes

#### Support / Utility

The source material offers druids as full casters with a spell list that
isn\'t quite as good as the Arcane spell list, but still quite potent.

#### Self-buffing Strikers

Druids also get a grab bag of miscellaneous nature-themed abilities,
including \"wild shape\", which allows them to assume animal forms and
then crush in melee combat as well as gaining other vicarious abilities.

#### Pets

Additionally, druids often have one or more powerful animal companions,
or have the ability to summon or control indigenous animals in whatever
wildland they find themselves in.

#### Diverging From Source Material

D&D 3e recast druids as shapeshifters who assume the forms of animals
and brawl, Beast Boy style.

Though conceptually this fits within the \"nature\" shtick of at least
some druids, due to mechanical chicanery that is easily exploitable
which allows druids to be unusually effective combatants, this mode of
play has skewed the concept of druid away from \"nature magic user\"
towards \"shapeshifter striker tank\".

On the plus side, a class that was previously not played very often in
earlier editions gained popularity commensurate with its perceived
empowerment.

When making a druid character in Pathfinder Fate Accelerated, you are
free to adhere to the Pathfinder / 3e version of the druid concept, or
you can harken back to ealier versions from an edition of Advanced D&D,
or you can more loosely make whatever your idea of a druid might be.

A lot of design space fits nicely under the broad label of \"druid\",
and Pathfinder Fate Accelerated encourages you to explore it to find
interesting character concepts.

#### The Green Faith

In the world of Golarion, the **Green Faith** (also known as the Old
Faith, the Great Eld, or the Wyrd) is a belief system based on the idea
that natural forces are worthy of attention, respect, and veneration.

The Green Faith is more a philosophy than an outright religion; it is a
way of viewing the world. The Green Faith can be found anywhere where
nature still holds sway and has not yet succumbed completely to the
ravages of civilization, whether it be deep forests, ocean coasts,
searing deserts, or arctic tundra.

Followers of the Green Faith meditate daily, commune with natural forms
of power, and show respect to nature in all things.

#### Druidism

Historically in our world, a Celtic druid was a member of the educated,
professional class among the peoples of Gaul, Britain, Ireland, and
possibly elsewhere during the Iron Age.

The druid caste included law-speakers, poets and doctors, among other
learned professions, although the best known among the druids were the
religious leaders.

It is thought that the core of druidism was a deep-seated belief in
reincarnation; not just in the transmigration of the soul from one human
form to another, but to other life forms as well. This belief in
reincarnation is sometimes credited as a contributing factor to the
druidic penchant for blood sacrifices. \]

#### Animism

Animism (from Latin animus, -i \"soul, life\") is the worldview that
non-human entities (animals, plants, and inanimate objects or phenomena)
possess a spiritual essence.

Animism encompasses the belief that there is no separation between the
spiritual and physical (or material) world, and souls or spirits exist,
not only in humans, but also in some other animals, plants, rocks,
geographic features such as mountains or rivers, or other entities of
the natural environment, including thunder, wind, and shadows.

#### Totemism

Totemism is a system of belief in which each human is thought to have a
spiritual connection or a kinship with the essence of another being such
as an animal or plant, often called a \"spirit-being\" or \"totem.\"

The totem is thought to interact with a given group or an individual and
to serve as their emblem or symbol, offering protection, and confering
some measure of the totem\'s perceived attributes upon the chosen
recipients.

#### Shamanism

Shamanism is a practice that involves a practitioner reaching altered
states of consciousness in order to encounter and interact with a spirit
world and channel transcendental energies or spirits into this world.

A shaman is a person regarded as having access to, and influence in, the
world of benevolent and malevolent spirits, who typically enters into a
trance state during a ritual, and practices divination and healing.

Shamans gain knowledge and the power to heal by entering into a
spiritual world or a similar \"other\" dimension.

Most shamans have dreams or visions that tell them certain things. The
shaman may have or acquire many spirit guides, who often guide and
direct the shaman in their travels in the spirit world.

::: {.Example}
[Nevaren](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Nevaren/Nevaren.aspx)
is a wild eyed and menacing master of the raven mysteries, able to call
all ravens and crows in his vicinity and bind the murder to his will.

A follower of the ancient Shoanti traditions of totemic animism, Nevaren
is a powerful shaman and wise man.

Attuned to the natural world and privvy to many secrets revealed by the
totem of the crafty Raven, he knows far more than he ever reveals.
:::

## The Fighter

This section provides suggestions and insights into how to translate the
ideas of the Fighter class from the source material into Pathfinder Fate
Accelerated.

:::flavor
\"Fighters excel at combat\-\--defeating their enemies, controlling the
flow of battle, and surviving such sorties themselves. While their
specific weapons and methods grant them a wide variety of tactics, few
can match fighters for sheer battle prowess. Soldiers, knights, hunters,
and artists of war, fighters are unparalleled champions, and woe to
those who dare stand against them.\"
:::

:::sidebar
#### Sample Iconics

[Dwyth](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Dwyth/Dwyth.aspx),
[Farwyn](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Farwyn/Farwyn.aspx),
[Hessia](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Hessia/Hessia.aspx)
:::

:::sidebar
#### Starting Archetype Sets

**Weaponmaster**: Combative +4

**Hero**: Combative +3, Focused +1

**Wily Warrior**: Combative +3, Roguish +1
:::

### Archetype Considerations

The only Archetype a fighter has to concern themselves with is
**Combatives**; everything else is optional. To be considered a fighter
(and not some other hybrid concept), a character should start with at
least **Combatives** +3.

For a standard starting character, this leaves only the decision of
where to put the final +1.

A hyper-specialized, dedicated fighter will go all in on **Combatives**
+4, but putting a +1 into one of the other Archetypes goes a long way
towards suggesting a more interesting background for the character. 
**Focused** is probably the most common secondary Archetype splash for
fighters, and **Roguish** is a close second.

**Focused** +1 is a very solid and safe choice for a fighter who is
sharp of wit, physically fit, perceptive, and quick on their toes.

**Roguish** +1 is a great choice for a street savvy fighter who lives in
a big city or that can benefit from some people skills.

**Primal** +1 is a reasonable choice for a fighter originating from a
remote outpost or trained as a scout or who grew up in the country
before becoming a soldier. However care should be taken to not veer over
into more of a ranger.

**Arcane** +1 is a more fringe choice but could make sense for a fighter
who was well educated at a university and studied magical theory
(arcana), or dead languages, or other esoteric subjects as a scholastic
exercise.

It would also make sense for a fighter who once worked as a guard for a
magic oriented individual or organization.

Dabbling in Arcane now at the \"basic knowledge\" level also opens the
door to later progression as a spell sword or magus.

Finally, remember that a Archetype can always defend against itself;
thus a fighter with Arcane +1 effectively has an \"improved save\" vs
arcane magic.

**Divine** +1 is perhaps the most unusual choice but not inappropriate
for a fighter who gained his education from a priest or a learning
institution affiliated with an organized church. Even if the fighter is
not a devout follower of some deity and does not intend to become a
paladin or war priest, knowledge of the forces of good and evil or of
cosmological concerns or of church politics might come in handy at some
point.

### Approach Considerations

Fighters are often **Careful** and rarely **Sneaky**.

Many, perhaps most, fighters are **Forceful**, but some more flamboyant
fighters trend towards **Flashy**. And many fighters are often passably
**Quick** with a blade, as it can often mean the difference in which
side of a fight draws first blood.

Most fighters, the rank and file, meat-shields, grunts, and the like,
have no need to be **Clever**; but there are educated and intelligent
men and women who follow the way of the blade\...officers, leaders,
tacticians, champions\...and they can be quite erudite and sharp of wit.

### What Kind Of Fighter, Exactly?

Generally speaking, when defining a character in Pathfinder Fate
Accelerated that you envision falling into the \"fighter\" category, you
might start out by asking yourself the following questions:

1.  Is my character more of a natural talent or are they the product of
    a training program?
2.  Is my character more of a brute force fighter or a finesse fighter?
3.  Is my character more of a any weapon will do sort or a master of a
    specific weapon?
4.  Is my character more of a heavily armored tank or a lightly armored
    skirmisher?

#### Self-taught or Trained?

How did your character became a fighter? Did they just pick up a sword,
toss on a chain shirt, and proceed to figure it out as they went? Were
they mentored by an older fighter? Or were they accepted or forced into
formal instruction such as in an army training program? And so on.

#### Brute Force or Finesse?

Some fighters rely on strength and power, others on speed and precision,
and others are somewhere in between. Deciding where your Fighter falls
on this spectrum will help you choose your Approaches at a minimum; a
brute force fighter will tend to favor **Forceful** or **Flashy**, while
a more finesseful fighter will tend towards **Quick** and / or
**Clever**, and a more defensive fighter will tend towards **Careful**.

It will also probably be reflected in at least one of your Aspects, and
possibly a Stunt.

::: {.Example}
[Hessia](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Hessia/Hessia.aspx) is
a heavily armored but aggressive fighter who likes to strike first,
strike hardest, and strike last. Used to dirty fights, she wears spiked
armor that quickly dissuades anyone trying to grapple her, and her
fearsome demeanor can set the knees of her enemies to quaking. Press
ganged and trained to serve in the now fallen order of the Grey Maidens,
Hessia has added a collection of rough and ready dirty tricks, low
blows, and vicious hackery to her original training. Hessia prefers the
longsword, but she\'s skilled in all variety of standard weaponry.
:::

#### Weapon Specialist or All-Arounder?

As weapons are just trappings in Pathfinder Fate Accelerated, with no
special intrinsic benefits, deciding what sort of weapons your fighter
prefers is ostensibly a fluff question, primarily influencing cosmetic
details and portrayal. But if you really want your fighter to be a
weapon specialist vs a generalist, you\'ll want to incorporate the idea
into at least one of your Aspects and / or at least one of your Stunts.

The main benefit to incorporating a preferred weapon into your
character\'s concept is that it can become a focal point for the
character and help anchor the persona in people\'s minds. Generic
Fighter Guy is boring and thus forgetable, but \"Renaldo\...master of
the twirling hand axes!\", will tend to stand out a little more.

::: {.Example}
[Farwyn](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Farwyn/Farwyn.aspx) is
a no nonsense fighter capable of laying waste to all who come near him.
Drilled and honed into a warrior for many years by a famous champion, he
now seeks fame and fortune in the harsh crucible of combat.

Farwyn\'s weapon of choice is the glaive, and he excels at striking down
all who stand against him in a whirlwind of precise violence.
:::

#### Heavily Armored or Lightly Nimble?

Some fighters pile on the armor, while others prefer to stay light on
their feet. Similar to choosing your preferred weapons, as armor is just
a trapping in Pathfinder Fate Accelerated with no special intrinsic
benefits the decision doesn\'t matter mechanically.

However your character\'s choice of armor might say something about
their personality and feelings about risk vs. reward. For instance does
your heavily armored fighter wear so much steel because they are
conservative and risk-averse, or do they throw themselves into the
thickest part of the fray with confidence in their metal shell\'s
ability to protect them from harm?

Does your lightly armored swordsman dart and circle around the edges of
a conflict looking for the best place to strike, or do they dance
through the melee with graceful lethality confident of their ability to
block and evade their foes\' clumsy attacks?

Thinking about these sorts of things will affect your portrayal at a
minimum, and might influence your Aspects and Stunts.

::: {.Example}
[Dwyth](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Dwyth/Dwyth.aspx) is a
sturdy defense oriented heavily armored fighter, able to turn a
momentary success in battle into a lasting defensive edge, and to see a
hard fight through to the bitter end. Trained as a Dwarven Armorine in
his youth, Dwyth did his time as a solider, then as a mercenary, and
most recently as a bounty hunter, but the iron discipline drilled into
him years ago holds true. Dwyth prefers his Dwarven Axe, but he\'ll kill
with whatever is handy.
:::

### Stunts

Fighter characters might find the following Stunt categories of
interest: [Warrior Stunts](#warrior-stunts), [Durability
Stunts](#durability-stunts), [Competence Stunts](#competence-stunts).

The following Stunts are offered as samples that might be relevant for
some fighters. However, the best Stunts are those that are tailor made
to fit your concept, so don\'t hesitate to come up with your own or work
with your GM to define something that is \"just right\" for your
character. See the [Stunt Options](#stunt-options) section for ideas on
how to do this.

#### Defensive

Fighters that intend to live another day typically develop their
defensive options.

:::description
**Alertness**: Because I am unusually alert and perceptive I gain +2
while Focused to notice things.
:::

:::description
**Canny Guard**: Because of my skill and experience as a warrior it is
difficult to catch me off guard. When I am defending against physical
attacks and tie, my opponent does not get a boost.
:::

:::description
**Combative Aegis**: Because I have developed my defensive form to a
high degree of skill, when I am Carefully Combative and appropriately
equipped, if someone else in my zone is physically attacked I may defend
on their behalf. However I take any shifts of damage that get past my
defenses, rather than the intended target.
:::

:::description
**Defensive Posture**: Because I am trained in a defensive fighting
style, if I get a boost when I am Carefully Combative while attacking I
may use it to create the situational Aspect **Defensive Posture** on
myself with two (2) invokes.
:::

:::description
**Heavy Armor Training**: Because I have trained to wear heavy armor
extensively, I gain +1 to Combatives to defend when I am heavily
armored.
:::

:::description
**Improved Disarm**: Because I like to disarm others, I get +1 when I am
Quick and attempt to create advantage to attach the situational Aspect
**Disarmed** to other people who weild weapons.
:::

:::description
**Indomitable**: Because I refuse to give in and I always vigorously
protect myself, I get +1 when I am Forceful and defend if I am aware
that I am in danger.
:::

:::description
**Just Roll With It**: Because I excel at avoiding harm and rolling with
whatever comes my way, I can use more than one stress box to absorb
stress from an attack (normally, only one stress box may be used to
offset stress from a single attack).
:::

:::description
**Light Armor Training**: Because I have trained to wear light armor
extensively, I gain +1 to Combatives to defend when I am lightly
armored.
:::

:::description
**Medium Armor Training**: Because I have trained to wear medium armor
extensively, I gain +1 to Combatives to defend when I am appropriately
armored.
:::

:::description
**Resilience**: Because of my impressive resilience, once per session if
I would take a Consequence I may instead spend a Fate point.
:::

:::description
**Stalwart Resistance**: Because my innate fortitude and intrinsic
vitality protects me, I gain +1 to defend against magical and unusual
attacks without needing special narrative justification or first
creating an advantage to invoke.
:::

#### Offensive

A fighter that never goes on the offensive would be a strange duck. Most
fighters have one or more techniques for making foes sorry to have
crossed their path.

:::description
**Acrobatic Fighting**: Because I am excellent at acrobatically flipping
around and tumbling to good advantage while in combat, when I am engaged
in a conflict I may add my Focused bonus to Combatives when I am able to
make my acrobatics relevant.
:::

:::description
**Aggressive Assault**: Because I am driven to extreme aggression, when
I am Forcefully Combative and attack I may add from one to four
additional Fate dice to my 4dF attack roll and choose the four best dice
as my result. However, until my next exchange whenever I defend I add
the same number of Fate dice to my defend rolls and choose the four
worst dice as my result.
:::

:::description
**Barehanded Fighting**: Because my fighting skills include barehanded
combat, I may use Combative instead of Focused when fighting barehanded
or grappling.
:::

:::description
**Bums Rush**: Because I like to overwhelm others, I get +2 when I am
Forceful and attempt to tackle or bowl over an opponent.
:::

:::description
**Combat Veteran**: Because I have engaged in so much combat, I gain +1
when I am Combative and attack.
:::

:::description
**Combat Veteran (-2)**: Because I have engaged in so much combat, I
gain +1 when I am Combative and attack or defend.
:::

:::description
**Forbidding Presence**: Because I present a very intimidating and stern
visage while emanating a frightenting aura, I gain +1 when being Flashy
and attempting to frighten or demoralize.
:::

:::description
**Forcefully Aggressive**: Because I am so physically powerful, I get +1
when I am Forceful and attack.
:::

:::description
**Lightning Draw**: Because I have mastered the art of the lightning
draw, I gain an automatic boost when I am Quick and draw my blade for
the first time in an exchange. Additionally, if I opt to do this at the
beginning of a conflict I gain +2 to determine who goes first.
:::

:::description
**Making It Count**: Because I am able to make my attacks really matter,
on an attack that succeeds with style I may spend a fate point to
prevent the target from checking a stress box to reduce the stress of
the attack. The target may still take consequences.
:::

:::description
**Passing Strike**: Because I have a fast-moving agile fighting style,
whenever I am Quickly Combative and attack, if I choose to reduce the
damage I inflict to get a boost I may use that boost to immediately move
one (1) zone away, as a free action. If I also spend a Fate point I may
move an additional zone further away.
:::

:::description
**Pounce!**: Because I excel at leaping into combat in a startling burst
of aggression, I gain +4 on my first attack in a conflict if I act first
and can charge, lunge at, or pounce upon an opponent.
:::

:::description
**Powerful Attack**: Because I am so skilled at delivering forceful
attacks, I gain +2 when I am Forcefully Combative and attack while armed
with a weapon.
:::

:::description
**Two Weapon Fighting (-2)**: Because I am so skilled at dual-wielding
two weapons, I gain +1 when I am Combative and attack or defend while
armed appropriately. Additionally if I make a physical attack while
armed appropriately and split shifts between exactly two opponents, I
inflict +1 shift of additional damage to each target.
:::

:::description
**Quick Strike**: Because I am fast and accurate, I get +3 when I am
Quickly Combative and attack an opponent that has not yet gone in this
exchange.
:::

:::description
**Weapon Mastery (-3)**: Because I have spent many years mastering a
type of weapon, I gain +1 to Combatives when I attack, defend, create
advantage, or overcome while using any weapon of that type.
:::

#### Multi-attacker

Some fighters are so skilled at laying about themselves with lethal
force that they may simultaneously engage multiple opponents in their
vicinity.

This sort of ability can take many forms to suit an individual
character\'s style. The below example of Whirlwind Attack is provided to
illustrate how such a Stunt can be structured to allow a fighter to do
this more than once per session by committing more than one Stunt slot
to the ability; this might be done at character creation or over time as
a character progresses.

:::description
**Whirlwind Attack**: Because I am a potent warrior once per session
when I am Flashily Combative and attack with a suitable weapon, I may
affect all enemy targets in my zone without having to split my shifts
between them.
:::

:::description
**Whirlwind Attack (-2)**: Because I am a potent warrior once per scene
when I am Flashily Combative and attack with a suitable weapon, I may
affect all enemy targets in my zone without having to split my shifts
between them.
:::

:::description
**Whirlwind Attack (-3)**: Because I am a potent warrior, when I am
Flashily Combative and attack with a suitable weapon I may affect all
enemy targets in my zone without having to split my shifts between them.
However if I use this ability more than once per conflict I take a
cumulative -1 penalty to my 4dF attack roll for each time I\'ve
previously used the ability in the current conflict.
:::

### Source Material Notes

#### Strikers

They fight, they fight. Fighty fight fight.

It\'s relatively uninspiring and no-frills, but regardless of the
straightforwardness of it Fighters are the defacto vanilla full martial
melee class in the source material.

The source material offers fighters as dedicated combat focused
characters who learn how to hit more and harder as well as gaining a lot
of feats as they level up.

#### Tanks

Fighters learn to make better use of armor and get tougher as they level
up, and are able to serve as damage sponges for a party of adventurers..

#### Diverging From Source Material

The source material has an unfortunate tendency to reduce Fighters to
little more than weapon and armor platforms, with combat maneuvers as
icing, leaving a player to manufacture their own \"flavor\" with little
support from the mechanics beyond whatever can be pieced together with
feat chains and \"archetypes\" (as defined in the Pathfinder rule
books).

The good news is that in **Pathfinder Fate Accelerated this is not the
case**; warriors gain a huge uplift both in richness of concept and in a
more even footing with casters thanks in part to the elegant design of
the Fate system, and due to the possibilities of the create advantage
action in particular.

So, just imagine the bold warrior you always wanted to play, and pick
Aspects and Stunts accordingly. Hopefully you will be impressed with how
interesting and dynamic the resulting character turns out to be.

## The Inquisitor

This section provides suggestions and insights into how to translate the
ideas of the Inquisitor class from the source material into Pathfinder
Fate Accelerated.

:::flavor
\"Grim and determined, the inquisitor roots out enemies of the faith,
using trickery and guile when righteousness and purity is not enough.

Although inquisitors are dedicated to a deity, they are above many of
the normal rules and conventions of the church. They answer to their
deity and their own sense of justice alone, and are willing to take
extreme measures to meet their goals.

Inquisitors tend to move from place to place, chasing down enemies and
researching emerging threats. As a result, they often travel with
others, if for no other reason than to mask their presence. Inquisitors
work with members of their faith whenever possible, but even such allies
are not above suspicion.\"
:::

:::sidebar
#### Sample Iconics

[Doritha](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Doritha/Doritha.aspx),
[Ephraim](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Ephraim/Ephraim.aspx),
[Skoth](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Skoth/Skoth.aspx),
[Thuvor](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Thuvor/Thuvor.aspx)
:::

:::sidebar
#### Starting Archetype Sets

**Fanatical**: Divine +3, Roguish +1

**Pragmatic**: Divine +2, Roguish +2

**Worldly**: Divine +1, Roguish +3

**Adaptable**: Divine +1, Roguish +2, Combative +1
:::

### Archetype Considerations

The only two Archetypes an inquisitor has to concern themselves with are
**Roguish** and **Divine**.

**Divine** +3 allows unrestricted spell casting using the [simple magic
guIdeliNes](#simple-magic-guidelines), which you should read first if
you are serious about playing a spellcaster. Also, write-ups for [sample
spells](#sample-spells) are available.

Thus if you want your starting inquisitor to be a full caster starting
out, you should consider the Fanatical set of Starting Archetypes, plus
one or two practical Stunts to shore up the practical facet of an
inquisitor.

Starting inquisitors who prefer to accentuate their practical side
should consider the Pragmatic or Worldly sets of Starting Archetypes,
plus one or two faith related Stunts to shore up their \"holy\" facet.

#### Freestyle

It\'s also possible to make a character that is conceptually an
inquisitor but mechanically defined with a Archetype other than
**Roguish**.

For instance the inquisitor of a god that deals in fundamental forces
might go with **Divine** & **Primal**, while the inquisitor of a god of
art and creativity might go **Divine** & **Focused** and the
inquisitor of a god of magic might go **Divine** & **Arcane**.

::: {.Example}
[Thuvor](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Thuvor/Thuvor.aspx)
serves the interests of Pharasma, The Lady of Graves, goddess of birth,
death, and prophesy.

A powerful demiurge, a master of both Theurgy and Anatheurgy, Thuvor
commands the fundamental forces of positive and negative energy.
Additionally, he is particularly adept at destroying the undead, which
are an abomination before Pharasma.

Greatly favored by his patron deity, Thuvor is engaged by his Lady
primarily to hunt down and deal with those trafficing in souls, to
oppose particularly egregious uses of necromancy, and to neutralize
overreaching intelligent undead who are disrupting the cycle of life and
death (such as an ambitious vampire lord).
:::

::: {.Example}
[Skoth](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Skoth/Skoth.aspx) is a
servant of the god of magic Nethys, The All-Seeing Eye, dedicated to
self-mastery of the disparate arts of magic and swordsmanship. He is big
on being mysterious, tries to cloak the full range of his abilities as a
surprise for the unwary, and keeps his own counsel.

In the service of Nethys, Skoth is a seeker of powerful magical
artifacts that have been lost to the world as a sort of
arcano-archaeologist.

Researching lost relics, and then questing to recover any that seem
likely, he sometimes receives visions from his god pointing him in the
right direction.

Woe be unto any would-be treasure hunters who seek the same prize\...
:::

### Approach Considerations

An inquisitor\'s choice of Approaches will usually be influenced by
their patron deity and the nature of their service to the religion
associated with that deity.

But stereotypically inquisitors are often **Sneaky**, **Clever**, and
**Careful** during an investigation, but then **Forceful** or **Flashy**
when persecuting a heretic or otherwise laying down their divine
judgment.

### What Kind Of Inquisitor, Exactly?

Generally speaking, when defining a character in Pathfinder Fate
Accelerated that you envision falling into the \"inquisitor\" category,
you might start out by asking yourself the following questions:

1.  What deity does my inquisitor serve?
2.  Does my inquisitor feel that they are only responsible for their own
    actions and have the ability to coexist with others who do not share
    their views, or do they hold those around them to the same code of
    conduct the inquisitor adheres to and persecute those who do not
    follow it?
3.  Does my inquisitor focus more on their divine or their roguish
    abilities?
4.  Is my inquisitor any good in a conflict, and if so how?

#### Whom Do You Serve?

The first question is probably the most important for framing the nature
of your character. You can use the choice of divine patron to guide your
decisions about your character\'s Aspects and Stunts, and to inform your
portrayal.

#### Contemplative or Evangelist?

Some inquisitors are portrayed as being inwardly focused, responsible
for their own deeds and conduct. In fact, some inquisitors conceal their
deific nature altogether, never mentioning their allegiance to their
deity or religion.

This sort of inquisitor can generally get along with others and
cooperate towards a common goal with people of different viewpoints, at
least to some extent. This is conducive to party dynamics and getting
things done.

Other inquisitors are portrayed as being outwardly focused, intent on
imposing the worship of their religion and the tenets of their patron
upon the world. This sort of inquisitor often has a difficult time
working and playing well with others, and often finds themselves
embroiled in some kind of strife due to their evangelical overtures and
intolerance for other beliefs. This can make for some great drama, but
on the other hand it can also get quite stale and annoying.

Regardless of where your inquisitor is at on that spectrum, thinking
about it now will guide your choice of High Concept and Trouble. It will
also indicate if you plan to portray the character in an antagonistic or
cooperative manner relative to other player characters.

#### Divine or Roguish Dominant?

Some inquisitors concentrate on their ability to get things done via
practical skills, while others favor deific pursuits. Obviously, where
your inquisitor sits on this spectrum will guide your decision on how to
assign your Archetype bonuses.

Secondarily, this question also covers consideration of whether or not
you want your inquisitor to start out with full spellcasting ability.

::: {.Example}
[Ephraim](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Ephraim/Ephraim.aspx)
is a kind and wise servant of Sarenrae, dedicated to reducing discord in
the world and furthering the growth of his religion. Quick with a kind
word and perhaps a small trinket picked up along the way on his long
travels, he has an uncanny ability to smooth relations even between
people of diverse viewpoints.

Also skilled at trading and bartering, he maintains enough of a sideline
in curios to fund his wanderings as well as give him a handy pretense of
commerce when traveling in more policed regions.
:::

#### Fight or Flight?

Unfortunately, conflict is inevitable. Inquisitors are not primarily
oriented around combat, but that doesn\'t mean that they cannot make
their presense felt when things get ugly.

By itself **Roguish** can be used to attack others and defend against
attacks with a bit of narrative justification, typically using light
weapons such as daggers and short swords, throwing knives, crossbows,
and similar \"practical\" weapons.

A character using **Roguish** to participate in melee combat avoids
straight toe-to-toe engagements and instead fights cagey or \"dirty\",
using the environment and surprise to their advantage. If at all
possible most rogues forced to do violence prefer to end the fight
quickly with a sneak attack or ambush, because they know that the longer
the conflict plays out the more likely they\'ll get cornered or whacked.

In a prolonged melee fight against an opponent using **Combatives**, the
longer the fight goes on the more difficult it will typically get for
the rogue to keep coming up with justifications for attacking and
defending while being **Roguish**. The nature of the scene set up and
clever usage of the create advantage action will determine how easy it
is to keep flogging the narrative for justifications, but simple action
economy favors an equivalently experienced foe using **Combatives** and
the rogue is definitely on a clock.

Fortunately it is relatively easy to level the playing field between
**Combatives** and **Roguish** with one or more Stunts such as the
following.

:::description
**Dirty Infighter**: Because I am skilled at dirty tricks fighting and
getting inside my opponents\' guard to strike at vulnerable areas, I am
a surprisingly effective combatant. Though my fighting style remains
unconventional and evasive, when armed with daggers, light one handed
melee weapons such as short swords, garrottes, saps, makeshift weapons,
and similar armaments I can use Roguish to directly engage opponents who
are using Combative in armed physical conflicts.
:::

:::description
**Shiv**: Because I am skilled with daggers of all shapes and sizes, I
may use Roguish as if it were Combatives when fighting with one or more
daggers in a conflict, and I inflict +1 stress when I successfully
attack while doing so.
:::

Alternately, an inquisitor with **Divine** +3 or higher can use
offensive spells as their contribution to a conflict.

Ultimately you\'ll need to decide for yourself if your inquisitor
chooses to avoid conflicts or is otherwise dead weight in a fight, or
not, and allocate your Stunts and Archetypes appropriately.

::: {.Example}
[Doritha](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Doritha/Doritha.aspx)
is a deadly Justiciar, lethal with sword and crossbow, unrelenting in
the pursuit and persecution of oathbreakers and theives foolish enough
to steal from a Temple of Abadar.

Few have ever evaded her judgment, and many have fallen to her blade or
been slain by her crossbow bolts. Any transgressors unfortunate enough
to have her upon their trail are likely not long for this world.
:::

### Stunts

Inquisitor characters might find the following Stunt categories of
interest: [Deific Stunts](#deific-stunts), [Dastardly
Stunts](#dastardly-stunts), [Archer Stunts](#archer-stunts), [Social
Stunts](#social-stunts), [Competence Stunts](#competence-stunts).

The following Stunts are offered as samples that might be relevant for
some inquisitors.

However, the best Stunts are those that are tailor made to fit your
concept, so don\'t hesitate to come up with your own or work with your
GM to define something that is \"just right\" for your character.

See the [Stunt Options](#stunt-options) section for ideas on how to do
this.

:::sidebar
#### Faith Worthiness

Inquisitors that are granted abilities by their patrons can lose access
to those abilities if they do something unworthy of their faith; thus
such Stunts typically include language to that effect.

This is left to the GM\'s discretion, but it isn\'t intended to create
antagonistic situations. Ultimately a player should have a large measure
of control over their character\'s story; any failings of faith should
be regarded as a roleplaying opportunity.
:::

#### Dangerous

Inquisitors are often surprisingly dangerous opponents.

:::description
**Back At You**: Because even my defense is dangerous, whenever I am
Quickly Roguish and defend with style against a physical melee attack
while wielding a light weapon I may use the boost to inflict a single
point of stress on my attacker, immediately, as a free action.
:::

:::description
**Careful Crossbowman**: Because I am skilled with a crossbow, I gain +2
when I am Carefully Roguish and attack with a crossbow.
:::

:::description
**Dirty Infighter**: Because I am skilled at dirty tricks fighting and
getting inside my opponents\' guard to strike at vulnerable areas, I am
a surprisingly effective combatant. Though my fighting style remains
unconventional and evasive, when armed with daggers, light one handed
melee weapons such as short swords, garrottes, saps, makeshift weapons,
and similar armaments I can use Roguish to directly engage opponents who
are using Combative in armed physical conflicts.
:::

:::description
**Divine Weapon (-2)**: Because I am favored by my patron deity, I have
been graced with a divinely empowered weapon. If I have recently done
something unworthy of my faith, the weapon loses its special abilities
until I have atoned.

:::description
###### Divine Weapon

**Aspects**

-   Divine Blade
-   Aura Of Protection

**Good At**:

-   Blocking (+2)
-   Cutting (+2)

**Bad At**:

-   Going Unnoticed (-2)

**Stress**:

-   \[1\]\[2\]\[3\]
-   Mild (2)
-   

See \[Special Items\] for details.

This item requires Divine +2 or better to use.
:::
:::

:::description
**Foe Bane**: Because I have a favored enemy Race, when I succesfully
attack a target of that Race I inflict +2 shifts of extra stress.
Additionally, if my attack results in a tie I may use the boost to
inflict a single point of stress on the defender, immediately, as a free
action.
:::

:::description
**Forbidding Presence**: Because I present a very intimidating and stern
visage while emanating a frightenting aura, I gain +1 when being Flashy
and attempting to frighten or demoralize.
:::

:::description
**Hip Shot**: Because I am skilled at rapidly shooting arrows, I gain +2
when I am Quickly Roguish and attack with a short bow or hand crossbow.
:::

:::description
**Making It Count**: Because I am able to make my attacks really matter,
on an attack that succeeds with style I may spend a fate point to
prevent the target from checking a stress box to reduce the stress of
the attack. The target may still take consequences.
:::

:::description
**Mobile Strike**: Because I have a fast-moving agile fighting style,
whenever I am Quickly Roguish and attack, if I succeed with style and
choose to reduce the damage I inflict to get a boost I may use that
boost to immediately move 1 zone away, as a free action. If I also spend
a Fate point I may move an additional zone further away.
:::

:::description
**One Against Many**: Because I am skilled at defending myself against
multiple attackers, I gain +2 to defend when I fight alone against two
or more opponents. A single mook defined as a mob counts as being
multiple opponents for purposes of this ability as long as there are two
or more \'individuals\' within the mob. \'Fighting alone\' in this
context means no allies are in my zone or an adjacent zone, and no ally
is aiding me or attacking my opponents.
:::

:::description
**Retribution**: Because my retribution is terrible when I succesfully
attack an opponent who has inflicted stress or consequences upon me in
the current conflict I inflict +1 shift more damage and this damage
cannot be reduced.
:::

:::description
**Sneak Attack**: Because I am good at looking unremarkable or going
unnoticed altogether only to launch a deadly and treacherous attack on
the unwary, I may add +4 when I am Sneakily Roguish and attack by
surprise. If I inflict a Mild or Moderate consequence on my opponent
with this attack I may spend a Fate point to bump the consequence from
Mild to Moderate or from Moderate to Severe.
:::

:::description
**Sudden Attack**: Because I am prone to sudden violence, I get +2 when
I Forcefully attack an opponent who is unaware of my intent.
:::

#### Durable

Many inquisitors are unusually resilient or difficult to injure.

:::description
**Close Call**: Because I excel at getting out of really bad situations,
I can spend a fate point to concede after I already rolled to defend
(normally a concession must be made instead of rolling to defend).
:::

:::description
**Divine Aegis**: Because my patron deity protects me I may use Divine
to defend against non-Divine magical and unusual attacks without needing
to first create an advantage to invoke, unless I have recently done
something unworthy of my faith.
:::

:::description
**Divine Favor**: Because I am favored by my patron deity, I may add my
Divine capability as a bonus to defend against physical attacks, unless
I have recently done something unworthy of my faith.
:::

:::description
**Divine Renewal**: Because I am favored by my patron deity, when I am
Carefully Divine I may pray for aid to clear a stress box or a Mild
Consequence, or to downgrade a Moderate or Severe Consequence, by
overcoming a difficulty equal to the stress box\'s or Consequence\'s
numerical value. This only works on my own stress and Consequences, not
that of others. If I fail to overcome the difficulty I may not attempt
to clear the same stress box or heal the same Consequence again; I must
wait for it to clear by other means. I cannot use this ability if I have
recently done something unworthy of my faith
:::

:::description
**Favored Follower**: Because I am favored by my patron deity, once per
scene when I spend a fate point to get a reroll I may proceed as if I
had rolled +2 on the dice instead of rolling a second time. I may not
use this ability if I have recently done something unworthy of my faith.
:::

:::description
**Rogue\'s Reflexes**: Because I have great reflexes and am able to
evade harm better than most people, I may use Roguish to defend against
any kind of indirect or surprise attack and to avoid harm by getting out
of the way of it. Narratively this can take many forms, such as rolling
out of the way, ducking behind cover, \'seeing it coming\' and somehow
interupting the attack, or by some other means justified by the
narrative.

This Stunt requires Roguish +2 to use.

NOTE: Roguish +3 and higher already allows a character to do this. This
Stunt is for characters who have Roguish +2 and are willing to allocate
a Stunt to gain this ability.
:::

:::description
**Shield of Faith**: Because I am favored by my patron deity, I may add
my Divine capability as a bonus to defend against indirect attacks such
as poisons and strange abilities and magic, unless I have recently done
something unworthy of my faith.
:::

:::description
**Stalwart Resistance**: Because my innate fortitude and intrinsic
vitality protects me, I gain +1 to defend against magical and unusual
attacks without needing special narrative justification or first
creating an advantage to invoke.
:::

#### Perceptive

Many inquisitors are perceptive, alert, mystically aware, or difficult
to fool or evade.

:::description
**Alertness**: Because I am unusually alert and perceptive I gain +2
while Focused to notice things.
:::

:::description
**Danger Sense**: Because I am unusually alert and perceptive I gain +3
while Quickly Focused to notice things that are dangerous, fast moving,
or pose an imminent threat to my safety.
:::

:::description
**Detect Evil**: Because I am sensitive to ethical and moral
propensities, I am able to sense strong concentrations of immorality and
evilness in individuals, objects, and areas from six (6) zones away even
if the source in not detectable to my other senses. Additionally, I gain
+2 to notice relevant concentrations of evil while Focused.
:::

:::description
**Manhunter**: Because I am skilled at tracking a quary, I can use
Roguish instead of Primal when tracking a sentient humanoid in any
environment, and I gain +1 when I Roguishly overcome challenges when
doing so in an urban environment.
:::

:::description
**Sense Deceit**: Because I am so skilled at sensing people\'s true
motives, I gain +2 when I am Cleverly Roguish and attempt to discern if
I am being deceived or tricked.
:::

:::description
**True Seeing**: Because my patron diety grants me awareness, my powers
of observation are divinely enhanced; I may use Divine instead of
Focused to notice or perceive things, and I can sense things that
require mystical awareness to detect.
:::

#### Inspired

Many inquisitors are divinely inspired or favored by their patron deity
with various abilities.

:::description
**Destroy Undead**: Because I am particularly good at destroying lesser
undead, while Flashily Divine I may overcome to destroy an Undead mook
in my zone or an adjacent zone; the difficulty is equal to the number of
hits the mook has remaining. This does work on mobs of nameless Undead
mooks, but it does not work on significant NPC Undead that have
consequences.
:::

:::description
**Divine Judgment**: Because I am empowered by my deity to pronounce
judgments upon others, I gain +1 while Divine to create advantage to put
a spell Aspect on an opponent in my zone or an adjacent zone. Only I can
invoke this Aspect, and I may invoke it to improve my rolls against the
opponent or to impose a -2 penalty on rolls made by the opponent. This
ability uses the Simple Magic Guidelines for create advantage and
overcome. I may not use this ability if I have recently done something
unworthy of my faith.

Creating Advantage with magic is explained in the [Simple Magic
Guidelines](#simple-magic-guidelines)
:::

:::description
**Fervent Prayer**: Because my faith is strong, I am sometimes
especially blessed by my god. I may spend a Fate point to gain +2 Divine
on one (1) action and pray for blessings appropriate to that level of
Divine capability. I may not use this ability if I have recently done
something unworthy of my faith.
:::

:::description
**Holy Hand Grenades**: Because my patron favors me, I am able to craft
special reliquaries containing holy power that are released upon impact
when thrown, inflicting harm on evil outsiders, undead, and other
unnatural creatures nearby. I cannot use this ability if I have recently
done something unworthy of my faith.

When I am Quickly Focused I gain +1 to throw a holy hand grenade into my
zone or an adjacent zone, generally against an Average (+1) difficulty.

If I am successful, my holy hand grenade explodes and inflicts a number
of shifts of damage equal to my (Careful + Divine) against every
eligible target in the zone without splitting shifts between them.
Malign outsiders (such as demons, devils, daemons, and proteans),
undead, and other similar unnatural creatures are considered to be
eligible for this effect.

For a given session I can carry around and use a number of holy hand
grenades equal to my (Careful + Divine). Other people can not use my
holy hand grenades.

This stunt requires Divine +1 or better to use.
:::

:::description
**Turn Undead**: When I am Divine and attack I may target all Undead in
my zone or in an adjacent zone without having to split my shifts between
them.
:::

:::description
**Universal Linguist**: Because I have a special ability with languages,
I can fluently speak and understand any spoken language I encounter.
:::

#### Savvy

Many inquisitors are practical people with experience in the sordid ways
of the world.

:::description
**Deceitful**: Because I am so deceitful, I get +2 when I am Cleverly
Roguish and create advantage or overcome challenges where my smooth
patter applies.
:::

:::description
**Friendly Diplomacy**: Because I am charmingly friendly to almost
everyone and am good at making friends and calming situations down, I
gain +2 whenever I attempt to avoid or end a conflict via non-violence,
keep the peace, or improve the \'mood of the room\'.
:::

:::description
**Skulker**: Because I am so good at escaping notice, I get +2 while I
am Sneakily Roguish and create advantage or overcome challenges to avoid
notice.
:::

:::description
**Slip Away (-2)**: Because I am excellent at getting away with it and
slipping away unseen, if there is a momentary distraction or opportunity
I may spend a Fate point to immediately exit the scene by means
appropriate to the narrative such as slippling away into a crowd, or
through a hidden door to a secret escape hatch I happened to know about,
or by using a magic item I happened to have, etc. I cannot be pursued in
the current scene.
:::

:::description
**Thrive Under Pressure**: Because I thrive under pressure, when I spend
a fate point to invoke one of my Aspects to gain a +2 bonus on an action
before I roll, if I succeed with style I get the fate point back
immediately instead of gaining a boost.
:::

:::description
**Town And Country Sneaker**: Because I am so good at lurking and being
stealthy, I can use Roguish instead of Primal to create advantage and
overcome when attempting to avoid being noticed in rural and wildland
areas (Roguish is already usable for this in civilized areas).
:::

:::description
**Wheeler Dealer**: Because I excel at talking my way into and out of
situations and making deals, I gain +2 while Cleverly Roguish in social
situations.
:::

## The Magus

This document provides suggestions and insights into how to translate
the ideas of the Magus class from the source material into Pathfinder
Fate Accelerated.

:::flavor
\"The magus blends magical ability with martial prowess into something
entirely unique, a discipline in which both spell and steel are used to
devastating effect.

As they grow in power, the magus unlocks powerful forms of arcana that
allow them to merge their mystical and martial talents further.

The magi faces lifelong toil, seeking arcane secrets to increase their
own might, while also training constantly to maintain their command of
the blade.

At the pinnacle of the magi\'s art, the magus becomes a blur of steel
and magic, a force that few foes would dare to stand against.\"
:::

:::sidebar
#### Sample Iconics

[Skoth](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Skoth/Skoth.aspx){\#ctl00\_Content\_ServerSideLink1\_link},
[Willamena](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Willamena/Willamena.aspx){\#ctl00\_Content\_ServerSideLink2\_link},
[Otaro](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Otaro/Otaro.aspx){\#ctl00\_Content\_ServerSideLink13\_link}
:::

:::sidebar
#### Starting Archetype Sets

**Spellblade**: Arcane +3, Combative +1

**Gish**: Arcane +2, Combative +2
:::

The general advice given in the [the Fighter](#the-fighter) and [the
Sorcerer](#the-sorcerer) (or [the Wizard](#the-wizard) if you prefer the
[Prepared Casting](#prepared-casting) model) class translation section
is also relevant to magi and you might want to skim them for general
arcanist and warrior relevant content. This document concentrates on
content of specific interest to magi.

For purposes of Pathfinder Fate Accelerated, there is no real barrier to
making a character that is able to cast spells and also be an effective
combatant, other than the fact that a starting character has Archetype
bonuses totalling to +4 and thus must spread themselves a little thin to
properly represent both martial and magical ability.

When making a magus character, you just need to decide if you are going
to split your Archetypes using the Spellblade starting set or the Gish
starting set. After that take one or more Stunts to firm up your
character\'s ability to be effective at both magical and martial
conflict, and that\'s all there is to it.

::: {.Example}
[Willamena](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Willamena/Willamena.aspx){\#ctl00\_Content\_ServerSideLink6\_link}
is a dangerously headstrong young woman of remarkable talents. Scion of
the noble house of Lebeda in Brevoy, Willamena was fascinated by
swordplay from a young age and insisted on lessons. Indulged, she soon
learned to merge her fencing skills with her natural arcane talent for
magic and thus inadvertently started her career as a sword-magi.

Having reached her majority and not in the direct line of succession,
Willamena has set out to have a grand adventure before her family
marries her off to some clod or other to cement alliances in the
worsening political climate of Brevoy. However, it remains to be seen
how long her shiny posh exterior will stay unsullied by the harsh
realities of life outside of the protected enclaves of the aristocracy.
:::

#### Three-way Split

You can also stretch the concept and add a third Archetype to the mix.
If you decide to do this, care should be taken not to spread your
character too thin lest they risk not being particularly good at
anything. However, it can be accomplished.

::: {.Example}
[Skoth](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Skoth/Skoth.aspx){\#ctl00\_Content\_ServerSideLink3\_link}
is a servant of Nethys dedicated to self-mastery of the disparate arts
of magic and swordsmanship. He is big on being mysterious, tries to
cloak the full range of his abilities as a surprise for the unwary, and
keeps his own counsel.
:::

### Stunts {\#stunts-9 .top-line-dotted}

Magus characters might find the following Stunt categories of interest:
[Magus Stunts](#magus-stunts), [Arcanist Stunts](#arcanist-stunts),
[Warrior Stunts](#warrior-stunts), [Durability
Stunts](#durability-stunts), [Special Stunts](#special-stunts).

The following Stunts might be of particular interest to a Magus.

#### Sword-Magi

The ability to meld magic and melee is the fundamental concept of a
Magus. Stunts such as the following allow a Pathfinder Fate Accelerated
character to leverage both their Combative and Arcane bonuses in a
conflict. Most if not all Magus characters should probably have some
variation of this sort of Stunt.

:::description
**Sword-magi**: Because I have trained as a Sword Magi and can fight
using my magic and my blade in tandem, when I am being Combative I may
add my Arcane capability to attack with a sword.
:::

By allocating additional Stunt slots or Refresh, a Magus can make an
even more potent version of this sort of Stunt, extending the situations
in which they can add both their Arcane and Combative bonuses to various
actions.

:::description
**Champion Sword-magi (-2)**: Because I have trained as a Sword Magi and
can fight using my magic and my blade in tandem, when I am being
Combative I may add my Arcane capability to attack and defend with a
sword.
:::

::: {.boxed}
**Master Sword-magi (-3)**: Because I have trained as a Sword Magi and
can fight using my magic and my blade in tandem, when I am being
Combative I may add my Arcane capability to attack and defend with a
sword. Further, when I am Arcanely attacking or creating advantage
against one or more targets in my own zone I may add my Combative
capability if it is appropriate to the narrative.
:::

#### Boost Upgrades

These Stunts can be taken independently or together. They function the
same way, allowing the magus to automatically upgrade boosts to full
Aspects which can then be used for various benefits in a conflict. This
loosely simulates some \[ Arcana\]{.text-bold}.

A secondary effect of these Stunts is that when they trigger they grant
a significant **tempo advantage** to the magus and this can also allow
them to potentially snowball into an unstoppable momentum. Thus there is
a tendency for the magus to become more dangerous the longer a conflict
progresses.

However, because this kind of Stunt only triggers when a boost occurs
there is a fair amount of variance, and also they are less likely to
trigger if the magus is significantly outmatched as the odds of getting
a boost are decreased.

The following are examples of this idea, but other variations are
possible.

::: {.boxed}
**Sword Of The Sword-magi**: Because I have trained as a Sword Magi and
am adept at using my magic in conjunction with my blade, if I gain a
boost when attacking while being Combative or Arcane, I may upgrade the
boost to the spell Aspect **Sword Of The Sword-Magi**, with two (2)
invokes. This allows me to imbue my sword with magical power.
:::

::: {.boxed}
**Shield Of The Sword-magi**: Because I have trained as a Sword Magi and
am adept at using my magic to protect myself in combat, if I gain a
boost when defending with either Combative or Arcane, I may upgrade the
boost to the spell Aspect **Shield Of The Sword-Magi**, with two (2)
invokes. I may invoke this Aspect when defending or to overcome harmful
situational Aspects.
:::

::: {.boxed}
**Spellstrike of the Sword-magi**:\
Because I have trained as a Sword Magi and can fight using my magic and
my blade in tandem, if I attack an opponent in the same zone while being
Quickly Combative and get a boost I may immediately invoke the boost to
attack a second target in the same zone while being Quickly Arcane.
:::

#### Eldritch Blade

In the source material one of the key features of a Magus is the ability
to apply touch spells via a weapon strike. Boost upgrades such as Sword
of the Sword Magi offers a more abstract way to illustrate this idea in
Pathfinder Fate Accelerated terms (invoking the Aspect gained from an
upgraded boost to add shifts of effect, narratively described as magical
effect).

However, some Magi may prefer a less open ended, more concrete approach
to this idea. Magically themed stunts that are described as enhancing a
weapon attack such as the below options are a way to do that.

::: {.Example}
[Otaro](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Otaro/Otaro.aspx){\#ctl00\_Content\_ServerSideLink14\_link}
is an unwilling pawn of Nethys with an affinity for ancient artifacts. A
naturally gifted sword fighter and master Magus, Otaro\'s youth belies
his ability for melding eldritch energies with his deadly bladework.
:::

:::description
**Shocking Blade**: Because I am able to generate a magical paralyzing
shock around my weapon, when I would roll 4dF to attack with my weapon I
may instead roll 6dF and choose the four (4) best dice for my result.
This is an electric attack and I cannot use this Stunt against opponents
who are immune to electricity.
:::

:::description
**Vampiric Blade**: Because I am able to generate a magical necromantic
aura around my weapon, when I attack with my weapon and inflict a
consequence I may clear one of my stress boxes or my Mild consequence.
This is a life-affecting attack and I cannot use this Stunt against
opponents who are not living such as constructs, undead, and some
outsiders (GM\'s discretion applies).
:::

:::description
**Chilling Blade**: Because I am able to generate a magical aura of
intense elemental cold around my weapon, when I attack with my weapon
and inflict a consequence I may also add a circumstantial Aspect with
two free invocations to my target called **Chilled To The Bone**. This
Aspect can be overcome by appropriate magic as a Superb (+5) difficulty,
or by mundane means of warming the target up as a Great (+4) difficulty
(but this usually takes more than an exchange to set up). If the target
already has this Aspect applied to them I may add another invocation.
This Aspect can be invoked by anyone to hamper the actions of the
target. I cannot use this Stunt on targets that are immune to cold.
:::

## The Monk

This section provides suggestions and insights into how to translate the
ideas of the Monk class from the source material into Pathfinder Fate
Accelerated.

:::flavor
\"Monks excel at overcoming even the most daunting perils, striking
where it\'s least expected, and taking advantage of enemy
vulnerabilities. Fleet of foot and skilled in combat, monks can navigate
any battlefield with ease, aiding allies wherever they are needed most.

For the truly exemplary, martial skill transcends the battlefield\-\--it
is a lifestyle, a doctrine, a state of mind. These warrior-artists
search out methods of battle beyond swords and shields, finding weapons
within themselves just as capable of crippling or killing as any blade.

These monks elevate their bodies to become weapons of war, from
battle-minded ascetics to self-taught brawlers. Monks tread the path of
discipline, and those with the will to endure that path discover within
themselves not what they are, but what they are meant to be.\"

:::sidebar
#### Sample Iconics

[Ejik](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Ejik/Ejik.aspx),
[Suki](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Suki/Suki.aspx),
[Volus](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Volus/Volus.aspx),
[Byragh](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Byragh/Byragh.aspx)
:::
:::

#### Starting Archetype Sets

**Phenom**: Focused +4

**Street Fighter**: Focused +3, Roguish +1

**Contemplative**: Focused +3, Divine +1

**Martial Artist**: Combative +3, Focused +1
:::

### Archetype Considerations

The only Archetype a monk has to concern themselves with is **Focused**;
everything else is optional.

To be considered a monk (and not some other hybrid concept), most
characters should start with at least **Focused** +3; which for a
standard starting character leaves only the decision of where to put the
final +1.

Most monks will go all in on **Focused** +4, but some might prefer to
put a +1 into one of the other Archetypes to round out a background or a
concept.

However the Martial Artist set of Starting Archetypes illustrates a
non-standard option.

**Roguish** +1 is a great choice for a monk with an urban facet.
Additionally, **Focused** and **Roguish** synergize well at higher
tiers of play, so a monk character who progresses through a few major
milestones as a **Focused** / **Roguish** split should offer a very
satisfying play experience.

**Divine** +1 might seem somewhat unusual, but some monkish orders also
have a spiritual facet and thus splashing **Divine** can make sense in
that context.

In the Pathfinder setting of Golarion many monks venerate the god
**Irori**, and a monk with **Divine** +1 who worshiped Irori would not
be out of place.

**Primal** +1 is a reasonable choice for a monk originating from a
remote temple or who is a recluse or trained at a mountain shrine or who
grew up in the country before becoming a monk. It\'s a solid choice,
particularly for an adventuring monk who might spend a large amount of
time traveling the wilderness.

**Arcane** +1 is a pretty unlikely option that would most likely be
taken to anchor a creative concept incorporating a more \"mystical\" or
overtly magical facet.

For instance, a monk with magical tattoos, or a monk that uses one time
\"scrolls\" to activate their strange abilities might take **Arcane** +1
to \"sell\" the concept.

Also, a Archetype can always defend against itself; thus a monk with
**Arcane** +1 effectively has an \"improved save\" vs arcane magic.
However, this is a relatively weak reason unto itself to invest in a
Archetype.

**Combatives** +1 can be a choice for a starting monk who also uses
weapons, though generally it\'s more efficient to take a Stunt allowing
the monkish character to use **Focused** instead of **Combatives** for a
small selection of weapons.

It is also possible to go the other way and make a monk with high
**Combatives** and a Stunt like **Barehanded Fighting** to allow
**Combatives** to cover barehanded fighting and grappling.

:::description
Because my fighting skills include barehanded combat, I may use
Combative instead of Focused when fighting barehanded or grappling.
:::

Going this route works well for a more practical and less mystical
barehanded fighter.

### Approach Considerations

Monks are quite diverse, and thus all Approaches are equally viable
depending upon what sort of monk is being represented.

Contemplative monks are generally **Careful**, while more scholarly or
academic monks are usually **Clever**.

Monks dedicated to fancy fighting styles might be **Flashy**, or
**Forceful**, or both. Many monks are able to be unusually **Quick**
when they need to be.

Monks that practice a secret style or oppose oppressive regimes tend to
be **Sneaky**.

### What Kind Of Monk, Exactly?

Generally speaking, when defining a character in Pathfinder Fate
Accelerated that you envision falling into the \"monk\" category, you
might start out by asking yourself the following questions:

1.  What \"role\" do I want my monk to fill?
2.  Is my monk Asian-inspired or an expression of some other concept?
3.  Does my monk concentrate on internal or external abilities?
4.  Does my monk use weapons or do they rely entirely on their innate
    abilities?

#### Role?

Unlike some of the other \"class\" concepts coming from the source
material, the monk fills no specific role, instead having a broad (some
might even venture semi-random) collection of abilities.

In D&D this leaves the monk as a wildcard, providing some advantages for
a small group where the monk can adapt to holes in the party lineup and
find a way to provide value, but struggling in a larger group where
every role is well covered by a specialist and the monk is cursed to
always play second fiddle to someone else.

But when you make a monk character in Pathfinder Fate Accelerated, you
get to decide what role you want your monk to attempt to fill.

You might intend for your monk to be a front line combatant, helping a
group to succeed in conflicts. Or perhaps you want to play a \"face\" or
leader monk who takes point in social encounters. Or you might want your
monk to be a problem-solver or \"support\" character who is either
specialized to address a particular niche or generalized to have a broad
range of \"utility\" allowing them to adapt to emerging challenges that
the group might face in their adventures. And of course, your monk might
attempt to fill more than one role or not be intentionally designed to
fit any particular role as you prefer. The big take away here is, it is
a blank slate for you to paint upon.

#### Inspired By?

The monk concept is more about
style\...flavor\...fluff\...schtick\...call it what you will, than
anything concrete or mechanical. Therefore, it is very helpful to have a
clear idea in mind when making a monk character.

You might want to stick to the idea of a character influenced in whole
or part by ideas taken from Asian cultures or your favorite martial arts
movies. You might also prefer to go a different route and express an
idea more inline with Western or Fantasy fiction norms. You might even
want to express something taken from your own imagination with no basis
in either.

::: {.Example}
[Byragh](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Byragh/Byragh.aspx) is
a misanthropic tiefling fueled by a combination of his inner abyssal
flames, the pain of poverty-stricken existence, and lifelong suffering.
He can project searing heat and scorching fire in a variety of different
ways. Additionally he has a wiry strength much greater than his
emaciated frame would suggest, and he fights purely dirty. More than one
fool has underestimated him with fatal results.
:::

#### Internal or External?

Your character might be a brutish brawler, or a mystic master of their
inner chi or \"qinggong\" or \"neigong\", something in between, or
something altogether different.

Thinking about this question should help you settle on a High Concept,
and inform your choice of Approaches and Stunts, and also your
background concept and portrayal.

Also, as the \"monk\" concept in D&D is effectively a stand in for a
broad spectrum of cultural myth, there is plenty of room to make more
atypical or even whimsical characters.

:::sidebar
#### Hard / Soft

A trope of martial arts that pops up in some venues is a supposed
dichotomy between \"hard\" and \"soft\" styles. This is usually
interpreted as \"external\" physical and striking arts and \"internal\"
psuedo-mystical or ki / chi based abilities.

If this trope appeals, you might make a monk that is all knuckles and
feet and no wuxia, or one that eshews such mundane exertions as punching
and kicking in favor of extraordinary abilities, or one that is a mix of
practical and mystical.
:::

::: {.Example}
[Ejik](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Ejik/Ejik.aspx) is a
quirky, upbeat, and hyperactive halfling acrobat-tumbler with a knack
for tripping up large folk with his energetic antics. But don\'t let his
small size and whimsical nature fool you; this pint-sized ankle biter
can be quite deadly when the situation requires it.
:::

#### Weapon or Barehanded?

**Focused** allows barehanded fighting and grappling by default, but if
you want to also use weapons you\'ll need to either invest in
**Combatives** or a Stunt that allows you to use **Focused** instead of
**Combatives** with a set of weapons, or a high **Combatives** with a
Stunt to cover barehanded.

If you want to be able to engage armed opponents who are using
**Combatives** while you are barehanded and using **Focused** without
having to constantly think up narrative justifications, you will want to
take a Stunt like **I Am A Living Weapon**.

:::description
**I Am A Living Weapon**: Because I have honed my body and my skills, my
unarmed strikes are equivalent to lethal weapons. I may use Focused
instead of Combative when fighting unarmed without any special narrative
justification or penalty. In situations where it matters I can choose to
be treated as attacking barehanded or attacking with a weapon, whichever
benefits me more in the situation. Finally, though I can be
inconvenienced or restrained, being disarmed is generally off the table
for me.
:::

::: {.Example}
[Suki](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Suki/Suki.aspx) is a
potent sword-mistress due to her sublime mastery of the Nine Katas of
Aori, and her impressive internal ki reserves. She will need all of her
skills to succeed at her personal quest to salvage her honor by
recovering her family\'s ancestral sword.
:::

::: {.Example}
[Volus](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Volus/Volus.aspx) is a
massive physical specimen, hugely muscled but lithe as a cat. Cast out
of his Shoanti tribe for being a thuggish meathead and stirring up
needless trouble, he now makes a living as a profressional fighter when
he can find gigs and otherwise gets by as best he can. His fighting
style is of his own devising, featuring a lot of powerful punches, knee
strikes, and elbow smashes\...and sometimes he just picks up an opponent
and tosses them around like a rag doll.
:::

### Stunts

Monk characters might find the following Stunt categories of interest:
[Fitness Stunts](#fitness-stunts), [Competence
Stunts](#competence-stunts), [Durability Stunts](#durability-stunts),
[Mental Stunts](#mental-stunts), [Warrior Stunts](#warrior-stunts),
[Special Stunts](#special-stunts).

The following Stunts are offered as samples that might be relevant for
some monks. However, the best Stunts are those that are tailor made to
fit your concept, so don\'t hesitate to come up with your own or work
with your GM to define something that is \"just right\" for your
character. See the [Stunt Options](#stunt-options) section for ideas on
how to do this.

#### Mentally And Physically Fit

Most monks have developed extreme mental and physical fitness as part of
their training.

:::description
**Alertness**: Because I am unusually alert and perceptive I gain +2
while Focused to notice things.
:::

:::description
**Impressive Reflexes**: Because I have excellent reflexes, I gain +1
while Quickly attacking.
:::

:::description
**Indomitable**: Because I refuse to give in and I always vigorously
protect myself, I get +1 when I am Forceful and defend if I am aware
that I am in danger.
:::

:::description
**Just Roll With It**: Because I excel at avoiding harm and rolling with
whatever comes my way, I can use more than one stress box to absorb
stress from an attack (normally, only one stress box may be used to
offset stress from a single attack).
:::

:::description
**Naturally Sneaky**: Because I am innately good at being sneaky, I may
use Focused instead of Roguish or Primal when Sneakily attempting to
avoid notice. However, I suffer a -1 penalty when I do so.
:::

:::description
**Naturally Sneaky (-2)**: Because I am innately good at being sneaky, I
may use Focused instead of Roguish or Primal when Sneakily attempting to
avoid notice.
:::

:::description
**Sprinter**: Because I am able to put on a little extra burst of speed
when I need to, once per scene whenever I move a zone I may choose to
immediately move another zone for free and this does not prevent me from
attacking. Alternately, if I do nothing but move I may use this ability
to move two (2) extra zones.
:::

:::description
**Strider**: Because I am fleet of foot and able to move quickly, if I
am in a conflict and do nothing in an exchange except move, I may move
an extra zone and I am unobstructed by foot hazards of less than knee
height. If I am in a contest involving me walking rapidly or running, I
gain +1 to overcome while I am Quick.
:::

:::description
**Sublime Expertise (-2)**: Because I am extremely skilled and rarely
blunder, whenever I make a 4dF roll I treat any result of less than 0 as
-1.
:::

:::description
**Tumbler**: Because I am excellent at acrobatically flipping around and
tumbling, if I am in a conflict and do nothing in an exchange except
move, I may move an additional zone and I am unobstructed by minor
obstacles that I can tumble around or flip over. If I am in a contest
involving me running away from something or avoiding capture, I gain +1
to overcome while I am Quick.
:::

:::description
**Very Strong**: Because I am so strong, I get +2 while I am Forcefully
Focused and create advantage or overcome when my great strength is a
factor.
:::

#### Martial Artist

Most monks have some skill at fighting.

:::description
**Brawler**: Because I am so strong, I get +2 while I am Forcefully
Focused and attack when fighting unarmed or grappling or when throwing
heavy blunt things.
:::

:::description
**Canny Guard**: Because of my skill and experience as a warrior it is
difficult to catch me off guard. When I am defending against physical
attacks and tie, my opponent does not get a boost.
:::

:::description
**I Am A Living Weapon**: Because I have honed my body and my skills, my
unarmed strikes are equivalent to lethal weapons. I may use Focused
instead of Combative when fighting unarmed without any special narrative
justification or penalty. In situations where it matters I can choose to
be treated as attacking barehanded or attacking with a weapon, whichever
benefits me more in the situation. Finally, though I can be
inconvenienced or restrained, being disarmed is generally off the table
for me.
:::

:::description
**Improved Disarm**:Because I like to disarm others, I get +1 when I am
Quick and attempt to create advantage to attach the situational Aspect
**Disarmed** to other people who weild weapons.
:::

:::description
**Making It Count**: Because I am able to make my attacks really matter,
on an attack that succeeds with style I may spend a fate point to
prevent the target from checking a stress box to reduce the stress of
the attack. The target may still take consequences.
:::

:::description
**One Against Many**: Because I am skilled at defending myself against
multiple attackers, I gain +2 to defend when I fight alone against two
or more opponents. A single mook defined as a mob counts as being
multiple opponents for purposes of this ability as long as there are two
or more \'individuals\' within the mob. \'Fighting alone\' in this
context means no allies are in my zone or an adjacent zone, and no ally
is aiding me or attacking my opponents.
:::

:::description
**Passing Attack**: Because I have a fast-moving agile fighting style,
whenever I am Quick and attack, if I choose to reduce the damage I
inflict to get a boost I may use that boost to immediately move one (1)
zone away as a free action. If I also spend a Fate point I may move an
additional zone further away.
:::

:::description
**Pounce!**: Because I excel at leaping into combat in a startling burst
of aggression, I gain +4 on my first attack in a conflict if I act first
and can charge, lunge at, or pounce upon an opponent.
:::

:::description
**Resilience**: Because of my impressive resilience, once per session if
I would take a Consequence I may instead spend a Fate point.
:::

:::description
**Retribution**: Because my retribution is terrible when I succesfully
attack an opponent who has inflicted stress or consequences upon me in
the current conflict I inflict +1 shift more damage and this damage
cannot be reduced.
:::

:::description
**Stunning Fist**: Because I have learned how to throw a vicious punch,
whenever I am Forcefully Focused and attack barehanded, if I succeed
with style and choose to reduce the damage I inflict to get a boost I
may use that boost to apply the situational Aspect **Stunned!** to my
target with two (2) invokes. The target can remove this Aspect by
overcoming a Superb (+5) difficulty.
:::

:::description
**Thunderous Jab**: Because I have learned how to throw a vicious punch,
whenever I am Quickly Focused and attack barehanded, if I succeed with
style and choose to reduce the damage I inflict to get a boost I may use
that boost to apply the situational Aspect **Staggered!** to my target
with two (2) invokes. The target can remove this Aspect by overcoming a
Superb (+5) difficulty.
:::

#### Mystically Adept

Some monks have mastered unusual abilities, or developed their inner chi
to such extremes that they are more than mundane.

:::description
**Close Call**: Because I excel at getting out of really bad situations,
I can spend a fate point to concede after I already rolled to defend
(normally a concession must be made instead of rolling to defend).
:::

:::description
**Cloud Step**: Because I have mastered a mystic discipline, I may defy
the normal bonds of the earth to float upon the wind and available
contact points as if I weighed no more than a feather. I am never harmed
or unduly inconvenienced by falling, even if I am unconscious. However
this effect is temporarily cancelled if I am encumbered or anchored by
more than half my own body weight.
:::

:::description
**Damage Reduction**: Because I am more durable than normal, I reduce by
one (1) all stress inflicted on me by physical and magical attacks.
:::

:::description
**Danger Sense**: Because I am unusually alert and perceptive I gain +3
while Quickly Focused to notice things that are dangerous, fast moving,
or pose an imminent threat to my safety.
:::

:::description
**Fast Healing**\[:\]{\#ctl00\_Content\_FastHealing\_lineFastHealing}
Because I heal extremely quickly, I reduce by 2 all stress inflicted on
me by physical and magical attacks. I appear to take damage but it
\'heals\' almost immediately in an impressive and potentially
intimidating display. However, this does not work versus stress
inflicted as damage by a specific reasonably common kind of attack and
in fact I take +1 shift of stress from such attacks.
:::

:::description
**Fated Fortune**: Because I thrive under pressure, when I spend a fate
point to invoke one of my Aspects I gain a +3 bonus instead of a +2
bonus.
:::

:::description
**Focused Resistance**: Because my innate fortitude and intrinsic
vitality protects me, I may use Focused to defend against magical and
unusual attacks without needing special narrative justification or first
creating an advantage to invoke.
:::

:::description
**Unusual Senses**: Because I a have unusual senses I gain +1 while
Focused to notice things, and I can sense things that are not detectable
by normal senses.
:::

### Source Material Notes

#### Self-buffing Barehanded Strikers

The source material offers monks as a putatively melee oriented class.
that eventually accrues a laundry list of supernormal abilties as they
progress.

Monks benefit from the best \"saving throws\" available in the game, a
high rate of movement, scaling barehanded damage, and some other useful
(but seemingly randomly chosen) class features.

#### Underpowered And Maligned

Monks are severely hampered by several problems. Despite being a primary
melee based class, the monk only has intermediate attack rate
progression, sub-optimal hitpoints, and at higher levels difficulty
hurting things with special resistances without expensive magic items.

The monk class is also one of the more divisive in D&D in general, and
Pathfinder is no exception. Some people find the entire concept to be
out of place in the largely western influenced fantasy genre.

Others have no philosophical problem with the idea but take exception at
the monk\'s low power level, or their quirky array of fluff abilities,
or the fact that the class is woefully Multiple Ability Dependent aka
**MAD** (meaning a character of the class needs multiple high stats
rather than a single high stat to be competitive).

Still others find it frustrating that the entire breadth of
[Wuxia](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wuxia) is shoehorned into the
rather odd assortment of class abilities granted by the monk.

The source material does offer ways to differentiate monks using
\"archetypes\" (as defined in the Pathfinder rule books) that allow
swapping out the more useless class features for better ones, style
feats, and other class and level manipulation shenanigans. There are
also certain specific feat chains that can be cobbled together and
exploited to help make the monk more competitive. However, an unpleasant
amount of system exploitation is involved.

Due to the perceived problems and despite a few specific viable builds,
the monk as a whole is widely regarded as being in competition for the
weakest or worst class in Pathfinder. Bottom line, the class is much
maligned and the potential of the overall concept largely falls on the
floor.

#### Diverging From Source Material

The good news is, if you are making a monkish character for play in
Pathfinder Fate Accelerated, you have the freedom to express whatever
sort of Wuxia or martial artist or barehanded pugilist concept you want.

Inspired by the rich traditions and fiction of Asian cultures, what
monks are \[meant\]  to represent is much more interesting and
exciting\...

::: {.margin-small .square-lists}
-   Incredibly skilled, amazing devotees of semi-mystical martial arts
    capable of physical and mental feats beyond the ken of normal folks.
-   Barehanded street fighters and brawlers, masters of diverse fighting
    arts.
-   Nearly superhuman masters of the inner potential of ki energy.
-   Practitioners of strange hard, soft, hidden, animal inspired, and
    even forbidden styles of combat.
:::

I.e., all the crazy stuff seen in countless \"kung fu\" movies.

The flexibility and permissiveness of Fate Accelerated is ideally suited
to allowing this kind of character to excel, and making a monkish
character in Pathfinder Fate Accelerated offers a lot of opportunities
to express a distinct concept and play it to great heights of
acheivement.

The system is not going to get in your way or force you down an
arbitrarily narrow path. The only limiters are your imagination and the
number of Aspect and Stunt slots available to you. :::

## The Oracle

This section provides suggestions and insights into how to translate the
ideas of the Oracle class from the source material into Pathfinder Fate
Accelerated.

:::flavor
\"Although the gods work through many agents, perhaps none is more
mysterious than the oracle. These divine vessels are granted power
without their choice, selected by providence to wield powers that even
they do not fully understand.

Unlike a cleric, who draws her magic through devotion to a deity,
oracles garner strength and power from many sources, namely those patron
deities who support their ideals. Instead of worshiping a single source,
oracles tend to venerate all of the gods that share their beliefs. While
some see the powers of the oracle as a gift, others view them as a
curse, changing the life of the chosen in unforeseen ways.

Oracles do not usually associate with any one church or temple, instead
preferring to strike out on their own, or with a small group of
like-minded individuals. Oracles typically use their spells and
revelations to further their understanding of their mystery, be it
through fighting mighty battles or tending to the poor and sick.\"
:::

Because Pathfinder Fate Accelerated doesn\'t use spell lists and the
magic guidelines allow free casting by default, the differences between
a cleric and a oracle boils down to the wording of Aspects and Troubles
to model a
[Mystery](http://www.d20pfsrd.com/classes/base-classes/oracle/mysteries){\#ctl00\_Content\_MysteryLink\_link
.purple} and a
[Curse](http://www.d20pfsrd.com/classes/base-classes/oracle/oracle-curses){\#ctl00\_Content\_CurseLink\_link
.purple} in order to capture the desired \"Oracle\" feel, and Stunts to
model any special abilities.

Therefore, it is recommended that players interested in making an oracle
type character refer to [the Cleric](#the-cleric) class translation
section and choose their Aspects, Trouble, and Stunts appropriately to
suit their concept.

In the case of an oracle character, any Stunt or ability that refers to
\"faith\" would simply be interpreted through the lens of their mystery
and curse instead of the religion of a patron deity.

:::sidebar
#### Starting Archetype Sets

**Fervent**: Divine +4

**Devout**: Combative +1, Divine +3

**Pious**: Combative +2, Divine +2
:::

### Source Material Notes

#### Diverging From Source Material

From a certain perspective, the Oracle class is an example of mechanics
before concept. Sorcerers allowed players to make a full Arcane
spellcaster using the \"spontaneous\" spell casting model, but no such
class existed for Divine casters.

Thus, the Oracle was made primarily to fill that mechanical gap and the
class amounts to a copy and paste of Sorcerers with some chrome changes.
Concept was entirely secondary.

The one distinct quirk of the class is the idea of a \"Curse\"
afflicting each Oracle, but functionally they amount to a bundle of
useful abilities paired with a detriment.

From a fiction perspective, overall the class is not well integrated
into the setting (though there are a few exceptions).

As Pathfinder Fate Accelerated is far more concerned with concepts than
mechanics, the concept of Oracles offers little to distinguish itself
from the Cleric concept. However, individual players and GM\'s can
overcome this by finding ways to more seamlessly integrate the Oracle
concept into their campaigns.

## The Paladin

This section provides suggestions and insights into how to translate the
ideas of the Paladin class from the source material into Pathfinder Fate
Accelerated.

:::flavor
\"Through a select, worthy few shines the power of the divine.

Called paladins, these noble souls dedicate their swords and lives to
the battle against evil. Knights, crusaders, and law-bringers, paladins
seek not just to spread divine justice but to embody the teachings of
the virtuous deities they serve.

In pursuit of their lofty goals, they adhere to ironclad laws of
morality and discipline.

As reward for their righteousness, these holy champions are blessed with
boons to aid them in their quests: powers to banish evil, heal the
innocent, and inspire the faithful.

Although their convictions might lead them into conflict with the very
souls they would save, paladins weather endless challenges of faith and
dark temptations, risking their lives to do right and fighting to bring
about a brighter future.\"
:::

### Archetype Considerations

The only two Archetypes a paladin has to concern themselves with are
**Combatives** and **Divine**.

Most starting paladins looking to match the source material should
consider the Pious set of Starting Archetypes, plus one or two combat
related Stunts to shore up their \"warrior\" facet.

Starting paladins who prefer to accentuate their ability to fight should
consider the Militant set of Starting Archetypes, plus one or two divine
related Stunts to shore up their \"holy\" facet.

Either way, a paladin\'s Archetype increase from their first major
milestone should usually be applied to Divine to reinforce the concept.

It\'s also possible to base a paladin on Roguish or Focused instead of
Combative, but it would put some pressure on Stunt choices and require
some patience to pay off with the passing of milestones.

:::sidebar
#### Sample Iconics

[Bordos](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Bordos/Bordos.aspx),
[Mirriam](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Mirriam/Mirriam.aspx),
[Radje](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Radje/Radje.aspx)
:::

:::sidebar
#### Starting Archetype Sets

**Pious**: Combative +2, Divine +2

**Militant**: Combative +3, Divine +1
:::

### Approach Considerations

Paladins of different gods are putatively different, but in practice
most paladins are more alike than they are disimilar.

Not to cast aspersions but few paladins are particularly **Clever**, and
even fewer are **Sneaky**.

Many paladins are **Careful**, and can also be quite **Flashy** when
their ire is up and the smiting ensues. But some trend more towards
**Forceful**, leaving off on the sermonizing and litany spouting in
favor of letting their relentless assault speak for itself.

And some paladins are at least a little **Quick**, but no more so than
is typical among those who live by the blade.

### What Kind Of Paladin, Exactly?

Generally speaking, when defining a character in Pathfinder Fate
Accelerated that you envision falling into the paladin category, you
might start out by asking yourself the following questions:

::: {.margin-small}
1.  What deity does my paladin serve?
2.  Does my paladin feel that they are only responsible for their own
    actions and have the ability to coexist with others who do not share
    their views, or do they hold those around them to the same code of
    conduct the paladin adheres to and persecute those who do not follow
    it?
3.  Does my paladin focus more on their divine or their martial
    abilities?
4.  Does my paladin have a steed or a divine weapon, or something else
    altogether, or nothing of the sort?
:::

#### Whom Do You Serve?

The first question is probably the most important for framing the nature
of your character.

You can use the choice of patron to guide your decisions about your
character\'s Aspects and Stunts, to inform your portrayal, the nature of
your character\'s interactions with others, and so on.

If your group is allowing the concept of a paladin as a divinely
empowered warrior dedicated to any deity rather than just the narrow
\"lawful good or evil\" definition enforced in the source material, the
opportunity for character differentiation expands considerably.

:::example
[Radje](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Radje/Radje.aspx) is a
dour and aggressive examplar of the war god Gorum. Eager for battle, for
the opportunity to repeatedly test himself in the crucible of combat, he
stomps through the world like a living seige weapon, a lumbering war
machine that walks upright on two legs.

Radje shows his dedication to the ideals of his bloodthirsty god in the
only way that matters; deed by bloody deed.
:::

#### Contemplative or Evangelist?

Some paladins are portrayed as being inwardly focused, responsible for
their own deeds and conduct. This sort of paladin can generally get
along with others and cooperate towards a common goal with people of
different viewpoints, at least to some extent. This is conducive to
party dynamics and getting things done. However, it can also be quite
dull.

Other paladins are portrayed as being outwardly focused, intent on
imposing the worship of their religion and the tenets of their patron
upon the world. This sort of paladin often has a difficult time working
and playing well with others, and often finds themselves embroiled in
some kind of strife due to their evangelical overtures and intolerance
for other beliefs. This can make for some great drama, but on the other
hand it can also get quite stale and annoying.

Regardless of where your paladin is at on that spectrum, it should guide
your choice of High Concept and Trouble. It will also indicate if you
plan to portray the character in an antagonistic or cooperative manner
relative to other player characters.

#### Divine or Combative Dominant?

Some paladins favor the warrior arts, while others favor deific
pursuits. Obviously, where your paladin sits on this spectrum will guide
your decision on how to assign your Archetype bonuses. For instance,
[Bordos](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Bordos/Bordos.aspx)
follows the Pious set of Starting Archetypes, while
[Mirriam](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Mirriam/Mirriam.aspx)
goes the Militant route.

::: {.margin-small}
:::description
[Bordos](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Bordos/Bordos.aspx) is
a stolid, stalwart, reliable, dependable, honor-bound human unusually
dedicated to the service of the Dwarven god of the forge, Torag. Human
paladins of Torag are \"essentially unheard of\" but Bordos is the
exception that proves the rule, and in truth despite his large and tall
frame he seems more Dwarf than man in word and deed. Determined to bring
honor to his calling, Bordos finds further favor from Torag with every
passing year and may one day be counted among the great champions of his
faith.
:::

:::description
[Mirriam](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Mirriam/Mirriam.aspx)
is a stern and no-nonsense woman dedicated to the service of Sarenrae,
the Dawnflower. Though kind to women and children, Mirriam is not overly
fond of men and is rather standoffish. She is bold, zealous, and willing
to intimidate or threaten those obstructing her holy mission. Mirriam
seeks out those who have committed evils, and delivers final mercy to
any who cannot be redeemed.
:::

#### Steed or Divine Weapon?

Some paladins have special steeds, and others get holy weapons. If you
want either you\'ll need to allocate one or more Stunt slots to cover
such abilities. If not, you can use those slots for other things.

### Stunts

Paladin characters might find the following Stunt categories of
interest: [Deific Stunts](#deific-stunts), [Warrior
Stunts](#warrior-stunts), [Durability Stunts](#durability-stunts).

The following Stunts are offered as samples that might be relevant for
some paladins.

However, the best Stunts are those that are tailor made to fit your
concept, so don\'t hesitate to come up with your own or work with your
GM to define something that is \"just right\" for your character.

See the [Stunt Options](#stunt-options) section for ideas on how to do
this.

:::sidebar
#### Faith Worthiness

Paladins that are granted abilities by their patrons can lose access to
those abilities if they do something unworthy of their faith; thus such
Stunts typically include language to that effect.

This is left to the GM\'s discretion, but it isn\'t intended to create
antagonistic situations. Ultimately a player should have a large measure
of control over their character\'s story; any failings of faith should
be regarded as a roleplaying opportunity.
:::

#### Holy Holy

Paladins are invested with divine power by their patron deities, though
the nature of such favor varies from deity to deity, or even from
individual to individual.

:::description
**Detect Evil**: Because I am sensitive to ethical and moral
propensities, I am able to sense strong concentrations of immorality and
evilness in individuals, objects, and areas from six (6) zones away even
if the source in not detectable to my other senses. Additionally, I gain
+2 to notice relevant concentrations of evil while Focused.
:::

:::description
**Destroy Undead**: Because I am particularly good at destroying lesser
undead, while Flashily Divine I may overcome to destroy an Undead mook
in my zone or an adjacent zone; the difficulty is equal to the number of
hits the mook has remaining. This does work on mobs of nameless Undead
mooks, but it does not work on significant NPC Undead that have
consequences.
:::

:::description
**Divine Aegis**: Because my patron deity protects me I may use Divine
to defend against non-Divine magical and unusual attacks without needing
to first create an advantage to invoke, unless I have recently done
something unworthy of my faith.
:::

:::description
**Divine Favor**: Because I am favored by my patron deity, I may add my
Divine capability as a bonus to defend against physical attacks, unless
I have recently done something unworthy of my faith.
:::

:::description
**Divine Renewal**: Because I am favored by my patron deity, when I am
Carefully Divine I may pray for aid to clear a stress box or a Mild
Consequence, or to downgrade a Moderate or Severe Consequence, by
overcoming a difficulty equal to the stress box\'s or Consequence\'s
numerical value. This only works on my own stress and Consequences, not
that of others. If I fail to overcome the difficulty I may not attempt
to clear the same stress box or heal the same Consequence again; I must
wait for it to clear by other means. I cannot use this ability if I have
recently done something unworthy of my faith
:::

:::description
**Favored Follower**: Because I am favored by my patron deity, once per
scene when I spend a fate point to get a reroll I may proceed as if I
had rolled +2 on the dice instead of rolling a second time. I may not
use this ability if I have recently done something unworthy of my faith.
:::

:::description
**Fervent Prayer**: Because my faith is strong, I am sometimes
especially blessed by my god. I may spend a Fate point to gain +2 Divine
on one (1) action and pray for blessings appropriate to that level of
Divine capability. I may not use this ability if I have recently done
something unworthy of my faith.
:::

:::description
**Shield of Faith**: Because I am favored by my patron deity, I may add
my Divine capability as a bonus to defend against indirect attacks such
as poisons and strange abilities and magic, unless I have recently done
something unworthy of my faith.
:::

:::description
**True Seeing**: Because my patron diety grants me awareness, my powers
of observation are divinely enhanced; I may use Divine instead of
Focused to notice or perceive things, and I can sense things that
require mystical awareness to detect.
:::

#### Defender Of The Faith

Paladins are martially capable, able to serve as defenders of their
faith and the faithful. Some rely purely on skill, while others benefit
from blessings that aid them in battle.

:::description
**Canny Guard**: Because of my skill and experience as a warrior it is
difficult to catch me off guard. When I am defending against physical
attacks and tie, my opponent does not get a boost.
:::

:::description
**Combative Aegis**: Because I have developed my defensive form to a
high degree of skill, when I am Carefully Combative and appropriately
equipped, if someone else in my zone is physically attacked I may defend
on their behalf. However I take any shifts of damage that get past my
defenses, rather than the intended target.
:::

:::description
**Damage Reduction**: Because I am more durable than normal, I reduce by
one (1) all stress inflicted on me by physical and magical attacks.
:::

:::description
**Divine Weapon (-2)**: Because I am favored by my patron deity, I have
been graced with a divinely empowered weapon. If I have recently done
something unworthy of my faith, the weapon loses its special abilities
until I have atoned.

:::description
###### Divine Weapon

**Aspects**

-   Divine Blade
-   Aura Of Protection

**Good At**:

-   Blocking (+2)
-   Cutting (+2)

**Bad At**:

-   Going Unnoticed (-2)

**Stress**:

-   \[1\]\[2\]\[3\]
-   Mild (2)

See \[Special Items\] for details.

This item requires Divine +2 or better to use.
:::
:::

:::description
**Forcefully Aggressive**: Because I am so physically powerful, I get +1
when I am Forceful and attack.
:::

:::description
**Heavy Armor Training**: Because I have trained to wear heavy armor
extensively, I gain +1 to Combatives to defend when I am heavily
armored.
:::

:::description
**Improved Disarm**: Because I like to disarm others, I get +1 when I am
Quick and attempt to create advantage to attach the situational Aspect
**Disarmed** to other people who weild weapons.
:::

:::description
**Indomitable**: Because I refuse to give in and I always vigorously
protect myself, I get +1 when I am Forceful and defend if I am aware
that I am in danger.
:::

:::description
**Making It Count**: Because I am able to make my attacks really matter,
on an attack that succeeds with style I may spend a fate point to
prevent the target from checking a stress box to reduce the stress of
the attack. The target may still take consequences.
:::

:::description
**Powerful Attack**: Because I am so skilled at delivering forceful
attacks, I gain +2 when I am Forcefully Combative and attack while armed
with a weapon.
:::

:::description
**Push Beyond The Edge**: Because I fight to the bitter end no matter
what the cost, at any time as a non action if my Severe consequence is
currently clear I may choose to either worsen my Moderate consequence
(if any) to a Severe consequence or take a new Severe consequence
**Pushed Myself Too Far** to clear my Mild Consequences and all my
Stress boxes.
:::

:::description
**Resilience**: Because of my impressive resilience, once per session if
I would take a Consequence I may instead spend a Fate point.
:::

:::description
**Smite**: Because I have been granted the ability to smite those who
stand against me by my patron deity, I gain +1 while Combative to strike
down a foe within my zone whose nature is anathemic to my patron deity;
further if my attack inflicts a consequence I gain an additional free
invoke on it.
:::

:::description
**Smite The Unworthy**: Because I am favored by my patron deity, when I
am being Combative I may add my Divine capability to attack opponents
who I know to be beyond redemption, unless I have recently done
something unworthy of my faith.
:::

:::description
**Weapon Mastery (-3)**: Because I have spent many years mastering a
type of weapon, I gain +1 to Combatives when I attack, defend, create
advantage, or overcome while using any weapon of that type.
:::

#### Companions

Paladins often have animal companions as mounts; see the
[Companions](#companions-5) section for details on how to incorporate
companions into your character using Stunts.

:::description
**Animal Companion (-3)**: Because **\[describe the reason you have an
animal companion\]**, I have attracted a powerful animal companion that
chooses to aid me.

:::description
###### Animal Companion

**Aspects**

-   Select two.

**Good At**

-   Spread +4 around 1 to 4 skill-like abilities

**Bad At**

-   Spread -4 around 1 to 4 skill-like abilities

**Stress**

-   \[1\]\[2\]\[3\]
-   Mild (2)
-   Moderate (4)
:::
:::

### Source Material Notes

#### Self-buffing Strikers

The source material offers paladins as melee combat focused characters
who are blessed with divine gifts that aid them in standing against the
evils of the world.

#### Tanks

Self-healing, armor, and plenty of hit points allows paladins to be
effective tanks.

#### Support

In addition to being respectable front line combatants, Paladins can
become quite good healers and status effect nullifiers.

#### Pet

Additionally, some knightly paladins ride powerful steeds, while others
get a fancy divinely empowered weapon.

#### Alignment / Code of Conduct

The downside of course is the infamous paladin code of conduct, the
morass that is D&D alignment, and the propensity for different GM\'s and
players to interpret moral and ethical quandries differently.

#### Diverging From Source Material

Pathfinder Fate Accelerated joyfully dispenses with the alignment
concept altogether; \"goodness\" and \"evilness\" and \"lawfulness\" and
etc. can be a thing, but it is based upon interpretation of Aspects and
deeds. If you want to play a \"lawful good\" character as per the source
material, so be it.

Pick your character\'s High Concept, Trouble, and Aspects appropriately
to further that ideal and then portray your character accordingly. But
there\'s no mechanical impact other than what is ordinarily available in
Fate Accelerated.

Also, the source material limits divinely inspired warriors to lawful
good and lawful evil alignments (paladins and anti-paladins). If you
want to play a divinely inspired character of another alignment, that
necessitates whole other classes such as the Inquisitor or the more
recent Warpriest.

In Pathfinder Fate Accelerated however, \"paladin\" is just a
concept\...a label. If you want to make a \"chaotic good\" divinely
inspired warrior dedicated to the service of some deity, and call that
character a paladin, go for it.

The source material also does little to differentiate between the
paladins of different gods, they are locked into rather vanilla sameness
by the class and level structure. Thus in the source material paladins
are a fairly homogeneous lot, baring any \"archetype\" (as defined in
the Pathfinder rule books), prestige class, or similar shenanigans.

But in Pathfinder Fate Accelerated you are not obligated to limit
yourself to arbitrary restrictions rooted in sacred cows or gamist
design that puts mechanics before concept.

Feel free to personalize your paladin to have abilities particularly
suited to their deity\'s focus and fluff; this will not only make your
character more distinctive and memorable, it will also make the
character\'s choice of deity matter more to the story.

The only limiter is whether the group or GM wants to maintain the
arbitrary restrictions of the source material or not. As a player
interested in expressing their creativity you should first check with
your GM to determine what they will allow.

## The Ranger

This section provides suggestions and insights into how to translate the
ideas of the Ranger class from the source material into Pathfinder Fate
Accelerated.

:::flavor
\"For those who relish the thrill of the hunt, there are only predators
and prey.

Be they scouts, trackers, or bounty hunters, rangers share much in
common: unique mastery of specialized weapons, skill at stalking even
the most elusive game, and the expertise to defeat a wide range of
quarries. Rangers are deft skirmishers, either in melee or at range.

Knowledgeable, patient, and skilled hunters, these rangers hound man,
beast, and monster alike; while some track man-eating creatures to
protect the frontier, others pursue more cunning game\-\--even fugitives
among their own people.\"
:::

### Archetype Considerations

Four Archetypes are of potential interest to a ranger, but an individual
ranger might only have bonuses in two of them. **Primal** covers the
\"wildlands survivor\" facet, **Combatives** covers the \"warrior\"
facet, **Roguish** covers the \"skilled and canny\" facet, and
**Focused** covers the \"alert and fit\" facet.

**Primal** is the most essential Archetype of the four for a ranger. All
rangers should have at least **Primal** +1. However, gaining **Primal**
+3 or higher is something that can be deferred until some major
milestones have passed, or avoided altogether for a ranger who is not a
spell caster.

**Combatives** is the next most essential Archetype for many but not all
rangers. Rangers that are top-tier warriors who also happen to have a
wilderness slant to them will generally go heavy **Combatives** with a
splash of **Primal**, for instance.

**Roguish** is also a solid Archetype to base a ranger character on,
such as the Stalker set of Starting Archetypes demonstrates.

Superficially, some people might assume that **Roguish** is synonymous
with \"thief\", but that is not the case. **Roguish** encompasses a
broad range of skills, and offers a lot to a ranger that is not entirely
anchored in being competent in wilderness settings.

So called \"urban rangers\", bounty hunters, thief-catchers, some scouts
and skirmishers, and the like are all examples of roguish rangers.

**Focused** is a secondary Archetype for rangers. Rangers are generally
defined by their skill more than their innate superiority, and going too
heavy into **Focused** can dillute this theme, pulling a character
towards other character concepts. **Focused** +1 is a good splash for
practically any kind of ranger, but creeping up higher on a starting
character will tend to make the character seem less like a ranger and
more like [the barbarian](#the-barbarian) or some other concept
altogether. :::

Most starting rangers looking to match the source material should
consider the Commando set of Starting Archetypes, while starting rangers
who prefer to accentuate their wilderness abilities and ramp up into
spellcasting should consider the Survivalist set of Starting Archetypes.
Rangers that want to be capable in both urban and wilderness settings
should consider the Stalker set of Starting Archetypes.

And of course, you are free to twiddle the dials to whatever permutation
you like; for instance **Combative** +1, **Primal** +3 or **Combative**
+1, **Roguish** +1, **Primal** +2, or even **Combative** +1, **Roguish**
+1, **Focused** +1, **Primal** +1 are all equally valid.

Going a little further afield, the Feral set of Starting Archetypes
offers an extreme variation on the ranger concept. A character going
that route would have to rely heavily on Aspects, Approaches, and Stunt
choices to anchor the character in the ranger concept instead of
something more like a druid or similar nature-based full caster.
[Pailey](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Pailey/Pailey.aspx) is
an example of such a verge character; she\'s somewhere between druid and
ranger, but her Stunts pull the character concept closer towards ranger.

::: {.Example}
[Pailey](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Pailey/Pailey.aspx) is
a half-wild Half-Elf with a strong connection to all things sylvan. In
addition to being fully at home in the woodlands, able to run as swiftly
as the wolves and strike just as suddenly, she is also innately able to
work powerul magics affecting the natural world.
:::

::: {.Example}
#### Sample Iconics

[Garak](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Garak/Garak.aspx),
[Pailey](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Pailey/Pailey.aspx),
[Yuler](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Yuler/Yuler.aspx)
:::
:::

#### Starting Archetype Sets

**Commando**: Combative +3, Primal +1

**Survivalist**: Combative +2, Primal +2

**Stalker**: Combative +1, Roguish +2, Primal +1

**Feral**: Focused +1, Primal +3 :::

### Approach Considerations

A **Flashy** ranger is virtually unheard of.

Rangers are pretty much invariably **Sneaky** and usually **Careful**.
Some are also **Quick** or **Clever**, or both.

Some rangers are **Forceful**, but they are a minority; rangers tend to
be more subtle.

### What Kind Of Ranger, Exactly?

Generally speaking, when defining a character in Pathfinder Fate
Accelerated that you envision falling into the \"ranger\" category, you
might start out by asking yourself the following questions:

1.  Does my ranger have the ability to cast spells, or do they instead
    rely on their advanced skills and competence?
2.  Does my ranger specialize in the wilderness or a particular terrain
    type, or are they equally capable in all environments?
3.  Does my ranger specialize in a particular fighting style such as
    two-weapon fighting or archery, or is how they engage in conflict
    not a central theme for the character?
4.  Does my ranger have an emnity with one or more types of opponents or
    are they equally capable against any type of foe?

:::sidebar
#### Specialist\'s Specialist

In a broad sense, D&D rangers are a very specialized sub-type of
fighter, or a fighter-druid hybrid.

However, the D&D conception of a ranger doesn\'t necessarily match up
that closely with the concept as presented in non-D&D licensed fiction
and mythology.

If your idea of a ranger is more of a hunter, or a woodsy warrior, or a
forest bandit, or lightly armored infantry, and so on, you are free to
express your concept.

A large design space falls within the label of \"ranger\"; have fun with
it.
:::

#### Spellcaster or Not?

If you want your ranger to be a spellcaster you need to decide how
deeply you are going to invest in **Primal**. If you want to start as a
full spell caster, you\'ll need **Primal** +3, which won\'t leave much
room to incorporate other facets into the character.

If you want to play a character who has some wilderness tricks and
perhaps a few extra-normal or minor spell-like abilities you can go with
**Primal** +2.

Otherwise, **Primal** +1 is where you\'ll want to turn the dial.

And if you don\'t want your ranger to be a spellcaster it opens up
possibilities for other special abilities, such as animal companions,
fancy fighting styles, and favored terrain and foes.

#### Preferred Environment or All-Terrain?

Some rangers specialize in a specific kind of terrain, such as the
mountains, or the forest, and hone their skills in their chosen
environment to extreme mastery. Other rangers are comfortable in any
clime and place, possibly even in cities and other bastions of
civilization.

Answering this question will lead you to settle on the disposition of
**Primal** and **Roguish** for your ranger. And obviously, if you are
going \"full wilderness\" you shouldn\'t assign any +\'s to **Roguish**.

If your ranger does have a favored terrain, it is also more likely that
they might have an animal companion from that terrain.

::: {.Example}
[Garak](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Garak/Garak.aspx) is a
survivor in every sense of the word. An infamous bounty hounter,
reknowned for his ability to track down and kill or capture criminals,
highwaymen, brigands, debtors, and such like no matter where they might
flee to or where they might hide. Competent, tricky, and resourceful,
he\'s a bad Dwarf to cross and an even worse one to have on your trail.
:::

#### Fighting Style or General Mayem?

Many, but not all, rangers specialize in a particular fighting style.
Others are just generally capable of physical violence by whatever means
necessary.

Either way, answering this question will lead you to adjust the
**Combatives** dial on your ranger, and will also guide your choice of
Stunts. It is probably also suggestive of an Aspect or even your High
Concept.

For instance, if a defining feature of your ranger is that you are a
skilled archer or a dual-wielder at a minimum you\'ll likely want a
decent **Combatives** bonus and at least one relevant Stunt to anchor
that concept.

Alternately, if you are not taking **Combatives** at all but you want to
be a weapon specialist of some kind you\'ll definitely need to allocate
a Stunt slot to allowing a different Archetype to be used in place of
**Combatives** in certain scenarios, such as \"when armed
appropriately\".

::: {.Example}
[Yuler](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Yuler/Yuler.aspx) is a
skilled tracker and a deadly accurate archer. Swift and stealthy, he
makes every arrow count and rarely misses. And almost nothing avoids his
notice.
:::

:::sidebar
A good way for a ranger with high **Combatives** to differentiate
themselves from a fighter is in their choice of Approaches.

Fighters tend to favor **Forceful** with **Flashy** being another
favorite for more swashbuckling types, while rangers tend to prefer
**Sneaky** and **Careful**.
:::

#### Favored Enemy or Equal Opportunity?

Some rangers have one or more kinds of creature or person whom they are
particularly good at tracking down and killing. Other rangers are less
picky about their opponents.

If you want to incorporate the source material\'s \"favored enemy\" or
\"giant-killer\" (reaching further back to earlier editions) theme it
will generally just boil down to using one or more Stunt slots to gain a
bonus against a particular kind of opponent. You might also reflect such
an emnity in an Aspect to anchor the idea.

### Stunts

Ranger characters might find the following Stunt categories of interest:
[Primordial Stunts](#primordial-stunts), [Warrior
Stunts](#warrior-stunts), [Archer Stunts](#archer-stunts), [Durability
Stunts](#durability-stunts).

The following Stunts are offered as samples that might be relevant for
some rangers. However, the best Stunts are those that are tailor made to
fit your concept, so don\'t hesitate to come up with your own or work
with your GM to define something that is \"just right\" for your
character. See the [Stunt Options](#stunt-options) section for ideas on
how to do this.

#### Primal Hunter

Many rangers are masters of the natural world, supreme trackers and
hunters, canny in their instincts, and feral in their ferocity.

:::description
**Alertness**: Because I am unusually alert and perceptive I gain +2
while Focused to notice things.
:::

:::description
**Ambusher**: Because I am great at setting up ambushes, I gain +1 when
I Sneakily set up an ambush or create a related advantage.
:::

:::description
**Foe Bane**: Because I have a favored enemy Race, when I succesfully
attack a target of that Race I inflict +2 shifts of extra stress.
Additionally, if my attack results in a tie I may use the boost to
inflict a single point of stress on the defender, immediately, as a free
action.
:::

:::description
**Hunting Archer**: Because I am a master archer and hunter, I may use
Primal instead of Combative to attack with any kind of bow and arrow.
:::

:::description
**Pass Without Trace**: Because of my mastery of the natural world, I
gain +1 when I am Sneakily Primal while in the wildlands, I am
unobstructed by undergrowth, and if I take a full move I may move three
zones instead of two. Finally, tracking me in wildland areas is very
difficult; those attempting it must overcome a difficulty equal to my
**((Sneaky + Primal) \* 2)**.
:::

:::description
**Pounce!**: Because I excel at leaping into combat in a startling burst
of aggression, I gain +4 on my first attack in a conflict if I act first
and can charge, lunge at, or pounce upon an opponent.
:::

:::description
**Stalking Hunter**: Because I am so good at stalking, hunting, and
pouncing upon prey unnoticed, I get +2 when I am Sneakily Primal and
create advantage or overcome challenges to set up and execute ambushes
while in wildlands.
:::

:::description
**Strider**: Because I am fleet of foot and able to move quickly, if I
am in a conflict and do nothing in an exchange except move, I may move
an extra zone and I am unobstructed by foot hazards of less than knee
height. If I am in a contest involving me walking rapidly or running, I
gain +1 to overcome while I am Quick.
:::

:::description
**Swamp Fighter**: Because I am so adept at fighting within swampy areas
and using my environment effectively, I may add Primal as a bonus when I
am Combative in swamps and marshlands.
:::

:::description
**Swamp Stride**: Because of my mastery of the natural world, I gain +1
when I am Sneakily Primal while in swamps and marshlands, I am
unobstructed by undergrowth and areas of water, and if I take a full
move I may move three zones instead of two. Finally, tracking me in
swampy areas is very difficult; those attempting it must overcome a
difficulty equal to my **((Sneaky + Primal) \* 3)**.
:::

:::description
**Tracker**: Because I am so good at tracking a quary, I get +2 when I
am Carefully Primal and create advantage or overcome challenges related
to tracking things down in wilderness settings.
:::

:::description
**Two Weapon Fighting (-2)**: Because I am so skilled at dual-wielding
two weapons, I gain +1 when I am Combative and attack or defend while
armed appropriately. Additionally if I make a physical attack while
armed appropriately and split shifts between exactly two opponents, I
inflict +1 shift of additional damage to each target.
:::

:::description
**Urban Jungle**: Because I have mastered the art of fading away,
blending in, and avoiding notice even in urban areas among people, I can
use Primal instead of Roguish to create advantage and overcome when
attempting to avoid being noticed in civilized areas (Primal is already
usable for this in rural, wildland areas).
:::

:::description
**Quick Shot**: Because I am skilled at rapidly shooting arrows, I gain
+1 when I am Quick and attack with any kind of bow or a hand crossbow
against a target in my zone or an adjacent zone. If I hit I inflict +1
shift of additional stress.
:::

:::description
**Weapon Mastery (-3)**: Because I have spent many years mastering a
type of weapon, I gain +1 to Combatives when I attack, defend, create
advantage, or overcome while using any weapon of that type.
:::

#### Durable Survivor

Many rangers are unusually resilient survivors, capable of living
through incredible trauma and harsh conditions.

:::description
**Immune To Mind-Affecting**: Because I am immune to mind-affecting
abilities, I am unaffected by any malign effect that relies on mental
coersion or disorientation.
:::

:::description
**Immune To Poison**: Because I am immune to poison, I am unaffected by
any malign effect that relies on poison.
:::

:::description
**Living Off The Land**: Because I am adept at surviving off of what
nature offers me, I am always able to find enough food and water to keep
myself and a couple of other people or animals healthy while in
wildlands and rural areas (i.e. above ground and not near a city or
town). Additionally if I\'ve had at least half a day to become familiar
with the terrain in a specific area of wilderness I gain +1 on all
actions while being Primal. How large the area of wilderness might be is
left to the GM\'s discretion, but it should be at least five square
miles.
:::

:::description
**Primal Reduction**: Because I am significantly more rugged, robust,
and survivable due to my deep connection with primal forces, I reduce by
one (1) all physical stress inflicted on me, and I reduce by two (2) all
environmental stress inflicted on me.
:::

:::description
**Resilience**: Because of my impressive resilience, once per session if
I would take a Consequence I may instead spend a Fate point.
:::

:::description
**Rogue\'s Reflexes**: Because I have great reflexes and am able to
evade harm better than most people, I may use Roguish to defend against
any kind of indirect or surprise attack and to avoid harm by getting out
of the way of it. Narratively this can take many forms, such as rolling
out of the way, ducking behind cover, \'seeing it coming\' and somehow
interupting the attack, or by some other means justified by the
narrative.

This Stunt requires Roguish +2 to use.

NOTE: Roguish +3 and higher already allows a character to do this. This
Stunt is for characters who have Roguish +2 and are willing to allocate
a Stunt to gain this ability.
:::

:::description
**Warrior\'s Mettle**: Because I have trained extensively and am made of
sterner stuff than most people, I may use Combatives to defend against
ranged attacks and targeted magic by deflecting such attacks with a
precise flick or parry of my weapon, or with my armor or a shield, or by
some other means justified by the narrative.

This Stunt requires Combative +2 to use.

NOTE: Combative +3 and higher already allows a character to do this.
This Stunt is for characters who have Combative +2 and are willing to
allocate a Stunt to gain this ability.
:::

#### Uncanny Animystic

Some rangers are deeply in touch with the natural world, and have
uncanny abilities that are more than mundane.

:::description
**Amphibious Swimmer**: Because I am amphibious, I may add my Primal
capability bonus when I am Focused while swimming. Additionally, while
swimming underwater I can hold my breath for an entire scene before
having to come up for air.
:::

:::description
**Danger Sense**: Because I am unusually alert and perceptive I gain +3
while Quickly Focused to notice things that are dangerous, fast moving,
or pose an imminent threat to my safety.
:::

:::description
**Natural Weapons**: Because I have natural weapons and am skilled in
their use, I may use Focused instead of Combative when my natural
weapons are relevant. In situations where it matters I can choose to be
treated as attacking barehanded or attacking with a weapon, whichever
benefits me more in the situation. Finally, though I can be
inconvenienced and my natural weapons can be fouled or restrained, being
disarmed is generally off the table for me.
:::

:::description
**Pass Without Trace**: Because of my mastery of the natural world, I
gain +1 when I am Sneakily Primal while in the wildlands, I am
unobstructed by undergrowth, and if I take a full move I may move three
zones instead of two. Finally, tracking me in wildland areas is very
difficult; those attempting it must overcome a difficulty equal to my
**((Sneaky + Primal) \* 2)**.
:::

#### Companions

Rangers often have animal companions; see the
[Companions](#companions-5) section for details on how to incorporate
companions into your character using Stunts.

:::description
**Animal Companion (-3)**: Because **\[describe the reason you have an
animal companion\]**, I have attracted a powerful animal companion that
chooses to aid me.

:::description
###### Animal Companion

**Aspects**

-   Select two.

**Good At**

-   Spread +4 around 1 to 4 skill-like abilities

**Bad At**

-   Spread -4 around 1 to 4 skill-like abilities

**Stress**

-   \[1\]\[2\]\[3\]
-   Mild (2)
-   Moderate (4)
:::
:::

The ability to share the senses of an animal companion can be useful.

:::description
**Companion\'s Senses**: Because I share a mystical bond with my animal
companion, I may spend a Fate point to share their senses for a scene at
a range of a few dozen miles. This allows me to witness events through
the senses of my companion as if I were present. This can be detected by
others with appropriate senses as a Quick + Primal overcome action vs a
Fantastic (+6) difficulty.
:::

### Source Material Notes

#### Strikers

The source material offers rangers as effective melee and ranged
combatants.

Rangers are often stereotyped as using bows and arrows, and in later
editions of the game due to the influence of a certain popular book
character dual-wielding rangers became a thing. But in actuality, a
given ranger might prefer sword and board, two-handed weapons, thrown
weapons, or whatever.

#### Skill-monger

Rangers are skilled, particularly in wilderness settings. They excel at
tracking, sneaking around, and surviving in the wilderness, and are also
capable hunters.

#### Support / Utility

In addition to being respectable front line combatants, rangers
eventually gain some nature magic spells.

#### Pet

Some rangers get an animal companion.

#### Diverging From Source Material

The source materials\' conception of the ranger has changed over the
years, with each new edition of the rules presenting a different take.

The underlying elements of the \"ranger\" concept have generally
included a martially competent, skilled character heavily focused on
wildnerness adventuring. Secondary ability to cast nature related spells
is also usually a thing as well.

However, you shouldn\'t feel obligated to adhere to source material; you
are free to be creative. Assign your Approach and Archetype bonuses, and
define your character\'s Aspects and Stunts to best realize *your*
\"ranger\" concept.

## The Rogue

This section provides suggestions and insights into how to translate the
ideas of the Rogue class from the source material into Pathfinder Fate
Accelerated.

:::flavor
\"Rogues excel at moving about unseen and catching foes unaware, and
tend to avoid head-to-head combat. Their varied skills and abilities
allow them to be highly versatile. Most excel in overcoming hindrances
of all types, from unlocking doors and disarming traps to outwitting
hazards and conning dull-witted opponents.

Life is an endless adventure for those who live by their wits. Always
one step ahead of danger, rogues bank on their cunning, skill, and charm
to bend fate to their favor. Never knowing what to expect they prepare
for everything, becoming masters of a wide variety of skills, training
themselves to be adept manipulators, agile acrobats, shadowy stalkers,
or masters of a dozen other professions or talents.

Thieves and gamblers, fast talkers and diplomats, bandits and bounty
hunters, and explorers and investigators all might be considered rogues.
Although many rogues favor cities and the innumerable opportunities of
civilization, some embrace lives on the road, journeying far, meeting
exotic people, and facing fantastic danger in pursuit of equally
fantastic riches. In the end, any who desire to shape their fates and
live life on their own terms might come to be called rogues.\"
:::

:::sidebar
#### Sample Iconics

[Draxton](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Draxton/Draxton.aspx),
[Eleo](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Eleo/Eleo.aspx),
[Magala](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Magala/Magala.aspx),
[Twilla](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Twilla/Twilla.aspx),
[Domidar](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Domidar/Domidar.aspx)
:::

:::sidebar
#### Starting Archetype Sets

**Scoundrel**: Roguish +4

**Cunning Dodger**: Roguish +3, Focused +1

**Thug**: Roguish +3, Combative +1

**Learned Sharper**: Roguish +3, Arcane +1

**Bandit**: Roguish +3, Primal +1

**Smooth Operator**: Roguish +2, Focused +2

**Bladejack**: Roguish +2, Combative +2

**Failed Apprentice**: Roguish +2, Arcane +2
:::

### Archetype Considerations

A broad base of competency is a useful trait for many rogues to have;
the wide variety of suggested Starting Archetype sets speaks to this
diversity.

Perhaps unsurprisingly, rogues are integrally associated with the
**Roguish** Archetype. So much so that to be considered a rogue (and not
some other hybrid concept), a character should start with at least
**Roguish** +2.

However, while a hyper-specialized, dedicated rogue might go all in on
**Roguish** +4, it is equally viable to go **Roguish** +3 and take +1 in
another Archetype, or **Roguish** +2 and +2 of another Archetype.

**Focused** +1 is a very solid and safe choice for a rogue who is sharp
of wit, physically fit, perceptive, and quick on their toes. **Focused**
+2 works as well, suggesting a character that is both skilled and
naturally gifted; well selected Stunts can tie this combination together
nicely.

**Combative** +1 is a great choice for a deadly rogue who is also
skilled in weapon and armor use. **Combative** +2 is also very viable,
representing a canny rogue that is also quite skilled at weapons play.

**Primal** +1 would be a good choice for a scout or a Rogue who is not a
big city slicker. However, dipping deeper into **Primal** will tend to
skew a character more towards [the ranger](#the-ranger) concept.

**Arcane** +1 works for a well educated rogue who was tutored or
matriculated from a university that taught magical theory (arcana), or
dead languages, or other esoteric subjects as a scholastic exercise.

Dabbling in Arcane now at the \"basic knowledge\" level also allows the
use of Scrolls and similar items that require **Arcane** +1.

There\'s also solid precedent in fiction of a failed wizard apprentice
becoming a rogue. Assuming the GM permits the option of a character with
**Arcane** +2 knowing a few spells using the guidelines in [Option: A
Few Known Spells](#option-a-few-known-spells), taking spells that
augment roguish endeavors can work very well for a rogue with a magical
edge.

Arcane Tricksters, Spellfilchers, Outlaw Mage, Beguilers, Unseen Seers,
Daggerspell Mages, Loredelvers\...the source material and third party
spin offs are full of hybrid rogue arcanists.

There is a lot of design space here for interesting characters.

::: {.Example}
[Domidar](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Domidar/Domidar.aspx)
started life as a wealthy merchant\'s son of unusual intelligence.
Gifted with a princely education and enrollment in the prestigious
College of Mysteries in Absalom, he trained as a wizard for years.

Sadly the winds of fortune blew ill and his family fell into ruin before
Domidar completed his studies. Unable to meet the tuition, Domidar was
forced out into the cruel world with nothing but his unfinished
wizarding training, and his well educated agile mind.

Living since then by his sharp wits, honeyed words, and deniable con
artistry, Domidar walks a wily path always chasing some new scheme to
\'get it all back\'.
:::

**Divine** +1 is perhaps the most unusual choice for a Archetype splash
but not inappropriate for a rogue who gained his education from a priest
or a learning institution affiliated with an organized church.

A rogue might even be a devout servant of a god of thieves. But even if
the rogue is not a devout follower of some deity, knowledge of the
forces of good and evil or of cosmological concerns or of church
politics might be useful in some campaigns.

#### Three Archetype Split

It is also possible to go with **Roguish** +2 and +1 in two other
Archetypes to model a specific concept.

Some mix of **Roguish**, **Combative**, **Focused**, and perhaps
**Primal** +1 can all work well.

### Approach Considerations

Rogues are a diverse lot, and thus all Approaches are equally viable,
depending upon what sort of rogue is being represented.

Thieves and other skulkers will favor **Sneaky** of course, and it has
been said by some that a good rogue is either **Quick** or dead.

Thuggish rogues can be quite **Forceful**, and swashbuckling adventurers
are often **Flashy**.

More urbane and wily rogues tend to be very **Clever**, and all those
who deal in traps or poisons or forgeries or anything requiring a steady
hand or ice-nerved patience are well advised to be **Careful**.

### What Kind Of Rogue, Exactly?

Generally speaking, when defining a character in Pathfinder Fate
Accelerated that you envision falling into the \"rogue\" category, you
might start out by asking yourself the following questions:

::: {.margin-small}
1.  Is my rogue a criminal of some kind or are they more of a skilled
    and resourceful professional?
2.  Is my rogue a specialist in a particular field or skill set, or a
    generalist?
3.  Is my rogue a self taught loner or were they trained by others?
4.  Is my rouge any good in a conflict, and if so how?
:::

#### Criminal or Professional?

Despite the stereotype, rogue is not synonymous with thief or criminal.
Assuredly, many rogues are indeed guilty of larceny or other illegality,
but just as many rogues apply their skills to legitimate ends\...or at
least stick to the fuzzy edges of the law.

Thus the first question is basically asking if your character is above
or below board, how do they make a living, and to what ends do they ply
their trade? Deciding where your rogue stands on such matters will
greatly inform your allocation of Approaches, choice of other
Archetypes, the usual trinity of Concept, Trouble, and Aspects, and of
course Stunts.

There is also good dramatic grist to be gained by playing a former
criminal trying to go straight, or a normally law abiding citizen being
pulled into dirty business.

:::description
[Eleo](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Eleo/Eleo.aspx) was born
into the lap of criminal luxury, the son of a well established Sczarni
crime lord. Raised to take over the \"family business\", Eleo knows
every trick and con in the book. But Eleo\'s tragic flaw was that he\'s
actually a decent, honest man with a conscience and integrity.

Parting ways with his larcenous kin, he struck out on his own, seeking a
more virtuous path. Though forced to sell his services as a swordsman to
make a living, and choosing to not take advantage of his more nefarious
skills to turn an easy profit via criminal activity, he seeks to make a
new life for himself on the up and up. Of course, fate seems to have
other plans for him\...
:::

#### Specialist or All-Arounder?

Rogues are all about skill mastery, but which skills and how many skills
they attempt to master varies. The second question is asking you to
decide what kind of rogue your character will be, or put in simple
terms: specialist or generalist?

While the **Roguish** Archetype will do a lot of the heavy lifting as
far as mechanical resolutions are required, your choice of High Concept,
Trouble, Aspects, Stunts, and whether you go all in on **Roguish** +4
starting out or opt for two or three Archetypes will be where your
character differentiates themselves from other rogues.

If you intend to play a specialist rogue, such as a \"trapfinder\" or a
\"pickpocket\" or a \"con artist\" or whatever, you\'ll want to take
very specific Aspects and Stunts that precisely dial in your speciality.

If you prefer to play an all-arounder generalist rogue that can adapt to
whatever the situation requires, you\'ll want to take very broad Aspects
and Stunts that offer milder but more widely applicable bonuses, or
perhaps allow you to use **Roguish** for things that normally require
other Archetypes.

::: {.margin-small} :::Description
[Magala](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Magala/Magala.aspx) is
a dangerous hired killer. A half orc with a dark past, she is a master
poisoner, knows her way around a garrote, and is absolutely lethal with
throwing stars and knives. And despite her large, powerful frame, she
can sneak around like nobody\'s business.

Magala has honed her stealth, ability to infiltrate places her marks
think themselves safe, contacts on the street, and competency with the
weapons of an assassin to ensure her ability to succeed in her dangerous
line of work. Her skills are justly famed, her street reputation is
impeccable, and her very specific services are in high demand. :::

#### Trained or Self-Taught?

The third question is asking you to decide how your character became a
rogue, as it should be a key touchpoint in their backstory. How did they
learn or develop their amazing skills? Did they just figure things out
as they went along, or were they mentored by an experienced rogue? Or
perhaps they received formal instruction as part of a guild, or were
pressed into service by a kidsman similar to Fagin in Oliver Twist? Did
they make any notable allies or enemies along the way?

Whatever your rogue\'s origin turns out to be, figuring it out will not
only help you select abilities and choose Aspects, it will also inform
your portrayal of the character, offer motivations and goals, and propel
your character forward into emerging storylines.

This is true of coming up with a solid origin story for any kind of
character of course, but it is even more essential to rogues as they are
the \"everyman\" niche of fantasy roleplaying.

Unlike the pure fantasy of wizards and clerics, the unacheivable heroic
prowess of fighters and barbarians, the unattainable esoteric mastery of
monks or bards, characters that are \"just\" very skilled at doing
basically mundane things are much more relatable and thus the story of
how they came to be who they are can resonate more authentically.

:::description
[Draxton](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Draxton/Draxton.aspx)
is a thief\'s thief. Hardened by the mean streets of Korvosa, he was
\'recruited\' into the Lightfingers gang as a child and forced to pick
pockets and engage in petty crime. But Draxton had natural talent and
quickly rose to a prominence as an \'earner\'.

In his late teens he went independent, and eventually became known among
the underworld of Korvosa as one of the best thieves in the city and
lived the dream for a while at the top of his game\...until he ran afoul
of the Hellknights by stealing the famed Eye of Mareketh. After a close
scrape with death Draxton thought it best to leave Korvosa, and set out
to find a new home\...
:::

#### Fight or Flight?

Unfortunately, conflict is inevitable. Rogues are not oriented around
combat, but that doesn\'t mean that they cannot make their presense felt
when things get ugly.

By itself **Roguish** can be used to attack others and defend against
attacks with a bit of narrative justification, typically using light
weapons such as daggers and short swords, throwing knives, crossbows,
and similar \"practical\" weapons.

A character using **Roguish** to participate in melee combat avoids
straight toe-to-toe engagements and instead fights cagey or \"dirty\",
using the environment and surprise to their advantage. If at all
possible most rogues forced to do violence prefer to end the fight
quickly with a sneak attack or ambush, because they know that the longer
the conflict plays out the more likely they\'ll get cornered or whacked.

In a prolonged melee fight against an opponent using **Combatives**, the
longer the fight goes on the more difficult it will typically get for
the rogue to keep coming up with justifications for attacking and
defending while being **Roguish**. The nature of the scene set up and
clever usage of the create advantage action will determine how easy it
is to keep flogging the narrative for justifications, but simple action
economy favors an equivalently experienced foe using **Combatives** and
the rogue is definitely on a clock.

Fortunately it is relatively easy to level the playing field between
**Combatives** and **Roguish** with one or more Stunts such as the
following.

:::description
**Dirty Infighter**: Because I am skilled at dirty tricks fighting and
getting inside my opponents\' guard to strike at vulnerable areas, I am
a surprisingly effective combatant. Though my fighting style remains
unconventional and evasive, when armed with daggers, light one handed
melee weapons such as short swords, garrottes, saps, makeshift weapons,
and similar armaments I can use Roguish to directly engage opponents who
are using Combative in armed physical conflicts.
:::

:::description
**Shiv**: Because I am skilled with daggers of all shapes and sizes, I
may use Roguish as if it were Combatives when fighting with one or more
daggers in a conflict, and I inflict +1 stress when I successfully
attack while doing so.
:::

Or a rogue might split between **Roguish** and one of the spellcasting
Archetypes, allowing them to potentially make magical attacks.

Ultimately you\'ll need to decide for yourself if your rogue chooses to
avoid conflicts or is otherwise dead weight in a fight, or not, and
allocate your Stunts and Archetypes appropriately.

::: {.margin-small}
:::description
[Twilla](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Twilla/Twilla.aspx) is
a skilled Trapbuster, with many years of experience and delves into
dangerous dungeons and ruins under her diminuitive Halfling-sized belt.

Employing a variety of alchemical devices to augment her roguish skills,
she is quite resourceful.

And when need be Twilla is also lethal with a sharp dagger or a
precisely aimed acid bomb, able to hold her own even against trained
warriors and fearsome monsters.
:::

### Stunts

Rogue characters might find the following Stunt categories of interest:
[Dastardly Stunts](#dastardly-stunts), [Social Stunts](#social-stunts),
[Competence Stunts](#competence-stunts).

The following Stunts are offered as samples that might be relevant for
some rogues. However, the best Stunts are those that are tailor made to
fit your concept, so don\'t hesitate to come up with your own or work
with your GM to define something that is \"just right\" for your
character. See the [Stunt Options](#stunt-options) section for ideas on
how to do this.

#### Socially Adept

Some rogues possess impressive social skills, able to finagle a mark,
work a crowd, read a room, and influence others.

:::description
**Alertness**: Because I am unusually alert and perceptive I gain +2
while Focused to notice things.
:::

:::description
**Can\'t We Find A Way To \'Work This Out\' Non-violently?**: Because I
am able to appeal to the baser instincts of most people and appear
extremely \'likeable\', I\'m good at avoiding unwanted conflict and
changing the nature of interaction from physical conflict to a mental
and social contest. I gain +2 whenever I attempt to avoid or end a
conflict via non-violence.
:::

:::description
**Charming And Coy**: Because I am adept at manipulating social
situations to my benefit, I gain +1 when I am Roguish and engage in a
social challenge, contest, or conflict.
:::

:::description
**Deceitful**: Because I am so deceitful, I get +2 when I am Cleverly
Roguish and create advantage or overcome challenges where my smooth
patter applies.
:::

:::description
**Friendly Diplomacy**: Because I am charmingly friendly to almost
everyone and am good at making friends and calming situations down, I
gain +2 whenever I attempt to avoid or end a conflict via non-violence,
keep the peace, or improve the \'mood of the room\'.
:::

:::description
**Sense Deceit**: Because I am so skilled at sensing people\'s true
motives, I gain +2 when I am Cleverly Roguish and attempt to discern if
I am being deceived or tricked.
:::

:::description
**Wheeler Dealer**: Because I excel at talking my way into and out of
situations and making deals, I gain +2 while Cleverly Roguish in social
situations.
:::

#### Canny Combatant

Some rogues are skilled at violence, or at least know how to handle
themselves in dangerous situations.

:::description
**Ambusher**: Because I am great at setting up ambushes, I gain +1 when
I Sneakily set up an ambush or create a related advantage.
:::

:::description
**Back At You**: Because even my defense is dangerous, whenever I am
Quickly Roguish and defend with style against a physical melee attack
while wielding a light weapon I may use the boost to inflict a single
point of stress on my attacker, immediately, as a free action.
:::

:::description
**Bushwhacker**: Because I am great at setting up ambushes, I gain +1
when I Sneakily set up an ambush or create a related advantage.
:::

:::description
**Careful Crossbowman**: Because I am skilled with a crossbow, I gain +2
when I am Carefully Roguish and attack with a crossbow.
:::

:::description
**Dirty Infighter**: Because I am skilled at dirty tricks fighting and
getting inside my opponents\' guard to strike at vulnerable areas, I am
a surprisingly effective combatant. Though my fighting style remains
unconventional and evasive, when armed with daggers, light one handed
melee weapons such as short swords, garrottes, saps, makeshift weapons,
and similar armaments I can use Roguish to directly engage opponents who
are using Combative in armed physical conflicts.
:::

:::description
**Fast Attack!**: Because I am shockingly fast, I gain +1 when I am
Quickly Roguish and attack. If I inflict a consequence on my target I
get an *extra* free invoke on it.
:::

:::description
**Foe Bane**: Because I have a favored enemy Race, when I succesfully
attack a target of that Race I inflict +2 shifts of extra stress.
Additionally, if my attack results in a tie I may use the boost to
inflict a single point of stress on the defender, immediately, as a free
action.
:::

:::description
**Forbidding Presence**: Because I present a very intimidating and stern
visage while emanating a frightenting aura, I gain +1 when being Flashy
and attempting to frighten or demoralize.
:::

:::description
**Hip Shot**: Because I am skilled at rapidly shooting arrows, I gain +2
when I am Quickly Roguish and attack with a short bow or hand crossbow.
:::

:::description
**Improved Disarm**: **Because I like to disarm others, I get +1 when I
am Quick and attempt to create advantage to attach the situational
Aspect Disarmed** to other people who weild weapons.
:::

:::description
**Lightning Draw**: Because I have mastered the art of the lightning
draw, I gain an automatic boost when I am Quick and draw my blade for
the first time in an exchange. Additionally, if I opt to do this at the
beginning of a conflict I gain +2 to determine who goes first.
:::

:::description
**Making It Count**: Because I am able to make my attacks really matter,
on an attack that succeeds with style I may spend a fate point to
prevent the target from checking a stress box to reduce the stress of
the attack. The target may still take consequences.
:::

:::description
**Mobile Strike**: Because I have a fast-moving agile fighting style,
whenever I am Quickly Roguish and attack, if I succeed with style and
choose to reduce the damage I inflict to get a boost I may use that
boost to immediately move 1 zone away, as a free action. If I also spend
a Fate point I may move an additional zone further away.
:::

:::description
**One Against Many**: Because I am skilled at defending myself against
multiple attackers, I gain +2 to defend when I fight alone against two
or more opponents. A single mook defined as a mob counts as being
multiple opponents for purposes of this ability as long as there are two
or more \'individuals\' within the mob. \'Fighting alone\' in this
context means no allies are in my zone or an adjacent zone, and no ally
is aiding me or attacking my opponents.
:::

:::description
**Passing Attack**: Because I have a fast-moving agile fighting style,
whenever I am Quick and attack, if I choose to reduce the damage I
inflict to get a boost I may use that boost to immediately move one (1)
zone away as a free action. If I also spend a Fate point I may move an
additional zone further away.
:::

:::description
**Retribution**: Because my retribution is terrible when I succesfully
attack an opponent who has inflicted stress or consequences upon me in
the current conflict I inflict +1 shift more damage and this damage
cannot be reduced.
:::

:::description
**Shiv**: Because I am skilled with daggers of all shapes and sizes, I
may use Roguish as if it were Combatives when fighting with one or more
daggers in a conflict, and I inflict +1 stress when I successfully
attack while doing so.
:::

:::description
**Sneak Attack**: Because I am good at looking unremarkable or going
unnoticed altogether only to launch a deadly and treacherous attack on
the unwary, I may add +4 when I am Sneakily Roguish and attack by
surprise. If I inflict a Mild or Moderate consequence on my opponent
with this attack I may spend a Fate point to bump the consequence from
Mild to Moderate or from Moderate to Severe.
:::

:::description
**Sudden Attack**: Because I am prone to sudden violence, I get +2 when
I Forcefully attack an opponent who is unaware of my intent.
:::

#### Competent Professional

Some rogues are just good at what they do, deeply competent experts in
full command of their craft\...whatever that may be.

:::description
**Dungeoneer**: Because I am a seasoned adventurer and dungeoneer, I
gain +2 when I am Clever and create advantage or overcome when a item of
common adventurer gear that I have proves to be useful.
:::

:::description
**Nothing Succeeds Like Success (-3)**: **Because nothing succeeds like
success, when I succeed with style and gain a boost I may upgrade that
boost to a situational Aspect on myself called On A Roll!** with two (2)
invokes on it. If the Aspect is already active, I instead add two (2)
more free invokes to it. The Aspect is removed at the end of the scene.
:::

:::description
**Pick Lock, Pocket, Or Number**: Because I am a thief without peer, I
gain +2 to overcome when I am Quickly Roguish and attempt to pick a lock
or a pocket, or to beat a combination or other form of complex lock.
:::

:::description
**Poison Master**: Because I am a master at using poisons and have built
up resistances to many of them over the years, I may use Roguish to
justify attack, defend, create advantage, and overcome actions whenever
poisons are relevent. Further, I tend to know or can usually find out
with little effort where poisons are bought and sold in urban centers.
:::

:::description
**Skulker**: Because I am so good at escaping notice, I get +2 while I
am Sneakily Roguish and create advantage or overcome challenges to avoid
notice.
:::

:::description
**Sublime Expertise (-2)**: Because I am extremely skilled and rarely
blunder, whenever I make a 4dF roll I treat any result of less than 0 as
-1.
:::

:::description
**Thrive Under Pressure**: Because I thrive under pressure, when I spend
a fate point to invoke one of my Aspects to gain a +2 bonus on an action
before I roll, if I succeed with style I get the fate point back
immediately instead of gaining a boost.
:::

:::description
**Town And Country Sneaker**: Because I am so good at lurking and being
stealthy, I can use Roguish instead of Primal to create advantage and
overcome when attempting to avoid being noticed in rural and wildland
areas (Roguish is already usable for this in civilized areas).
:::

:::description
**Trap Sense**: Because I have preternaturally sharp senses and fast
reflexes, I gain +1 when I am Quickly Roguish and attempt to notice,
overcome, or defend against a trap.
:::

:::description
**Trapsetter**: Because I am skilled at setting traps, as a non-action I
can spend a Fate point to create the situational Aspect **Trapped!** on
my zone or up to three (3) zones away with two (2) invokes. The Aspect
represents a trap I happened to have set up while no one was looking, or
a clever exploitation of the ambient scenery. My traps can take many
forms, limited only to things I can narratively justify. I can invoke
the Aspect to hinder someone in the affected zone or to help myself or
an ally acting against someone in the affected zone. The difficulty for
others to notice my trap before the first time it is invoked or to
overcome it is equal to my (Clever + Sneaky + Primal) traits if in a
wildlands area, otherwise it is equal to my (Clever + Sneaky + Roguish)
traits.
:::

:::description
**Tumbler**: Because I am excellent at acrobatically flipping around and
tumbling, if I am in a conflict and do nothing in an exchange except
move, I may move an additional zone and I am unobstructed by minor
obstacles that I can tumble around or flip over. If I am in a contest
involving me running away from something or avoiding capture, I gain +1
to overcome while I am Quick.
:::

:::description
**Universal Linguist**: Because I have a special ability with languages,
I can fluently speak and understand any spoken language I encounter.
:::

#### Slippery Survivor

Some rogues just manage to scrape out of all manner of hapless
situations, whether by skill or luck or a mix of both.

:::description
**Close Call**: Because I excel at getting out of really bad situations,
I can spend a fate point to concede after I already rolled to defend
(normally a concession must be made instead of rolling to defend).
:::

:::description
**Cut And Run!**: Because I am excellent at getting away with it, if I
am in a conflict and do nothing in an exchange except move away from
danger, I may move two extra zones and I am unobstructed by urban
detritus and crowds. If I am in a contest involving me running away or
avoiding capture, I gain +2 to overcome while I am Quickly Roguish. This
ability only works in urban areas.
:::

:::description
**Danger Sense**: Because I am unusually alert and perceptive I gain +3
while Quickly Focused to notice things that are dangerous, fast moving,
or pose an imminent threat to my safety.
:::

:::description
**Fated Fortune**: Because I thrive under pressure, when I spend a fate
point to invoke one of my Aspects I gain a +3 bonus instead of a +2
bonus.
:::

:::description
**Impressive Reflexes**: Because I have excellent reflexes, I gain +1
while Quickly attacking.
:::

:::description
**Just Roll With It**: Because I excel at avoiding harm and rolling with
whatever comes my way, I can use more than one stress box to absorb
stress from an attack (normally, only one stress box may be used to
offset stress from a single attack).
:::

:::description
**Rogue\'s Reflexes**: Because I have great reflexes and am able to
evade harm better than most people, I may use Roguish to defend against
any kind of indirect or surprise attack and to avoid harm by getting out
of the way of it. Narratively this can take many forms, such as rolling
out of the way, ducking behind cover, \'seeing it coming\' and somehow
interupting the attack, or by some other means justified by the
narrative.

This Stunt requires Roguish +2 to use.

NOTE: Roguish +3 and higher already allows a character to do this. This
Stunt is for characters who have Roguish +2 and are willing to allocate
a Stunt to gain this ability.
:::

:::description
**Slip Away (-2)**: Because I am excellent at getting away with it and
slipping away unseen, if there is a momentary distraction or opportunity
I may spend a Fate point to immediately exit the scene by means
appropriate to the narrative such as slippling away into a crowd, or
through a hidden door to a secret escape hatch I happened to know about,
or by using a magic item I happened to have, etc. I cannot be pursued in
the current scene.
:::

:::description
**Urban Opportunist**: Because I am so adept at taking advantage of
situational opportunities in civilized settlements, I gain +1 when I am
Roguish and create advantage or overcome to interact with the area or
scene while I am in typical urban areas.
:::
:::

### Source Material Notes

#### Skill-mongers

The source material offers rogues as skill-mongers (or \"skill monkeys\"
as you prefer), with both a large skill list and a lot of skill points
to apply to them.

Unfortunately this doesn\'t mean as much as it used to due to a major
change Pathfinder made from 3.x to class skills vs non-class skills, as
well as the consolidation of a number of skills key to the rogue\'s
traditional niche.

Due to these changes, the number of skill points available to rogues is
quite superfulous, and classes that get a slightly smaller skill list
and slightly fewer skill points are still able to compete with rogues on
the skill front.

And oddly, though the flavor text for rogues makes a big deal out of how
good they are supposed to be at certain things like being stealthy, or
noticing things, or bluffing, or getting into places they should not be,
they get no particular mechanical advantage to make it true and are thus
no better at it than other classes with overlapping skills.

#### Trap Finders

There are also some specific protected niches intended to offer rogues
role protection around detecting and disarming traps. But some
\"archetypes\" (as defined by the Pathfinder rule books) for other
classes as well as some Traits allow non-rogues to also gain access to
this niche, which further erodes the rogue\'s position.

Also, traps in general tend to be much tamer in Pathfinder than in
earlier editions of D&D, greatly lessening the imperative to have a top
notch trapbuster in a party.

#### Burst Damage Strikers

In theory rogues are also able to be burst damage strikers thanks to the
\"sneak attack\" mechanic, but in practice their middling attack bonus
and severe restrictions on the ability\'s use makes that less of a
reality than the hype suggests.

#### Underpowered

Due to the many problems with the class, both real and perhaps only
perceived, general regard for the rogue class has fallen substantially
from the heady days of D&D 3e\'s release to now.

In fact, the rogue is often cited as being the weakest Pathfinder class,
rightly or wrongly. So much so that three different alternate full
classes have been released to backstop the gap; the Ninja, the
Investigator, and the Slayer.

#### Ninja / Investigator / Slayer

Pathfinder Fate Accelerated abstracts away from formal classes in favor
of broad concepts; thus all class concepts that are thematically tied to
the idea of a \"rogue\" fall within the rogue design space.

Make your character, incorporating ideas as you like, and what you call
it is up to you.

#### Diverging From Source Material

If you are a fan of the rogue concept, there\'s good news. First off,
Pathfinder Fate Accelerated doesn\'t use a \"skill\" model; the six
Archetypes instead model broad ability sets, a consolidation that favors
the rogue compared to the skill dilution of the source material.

Secondly, the source material is sometimes (often?) said to have a
\"martial caster disparity\", whereby spellcasters are just flat out
better than non-spellcasting classes by mid-levels of play.

This is not the case in Pathfinder Fate Accelerated; spellcasters might
have an easier time justifying certain ideas, but non-spellcasters
correspondingly have an easier time justifying other ideas as well.

And all mechanical outcomes are resolved using the four basic actions of
Fate Accelerated; attack, defend, create advantage, and overcome. This
baseline, common to both spellcasters and non-spellcasters, prevents a
disparity.

These two big points (as well as several secondary nuances) mean that if
you decide to play a rogue in Pathfinder Fate Accelerated, you\'ll have
a good deal of creative freedom to define your character, the roguish
niche of \"highly skilled person\" will be meaningful, and your rogue
will not be rendered obsolete by a spellcasting teammate as your
characters advance.

So, go for it. Make the rogue character you envision, free of any
class-based doublethink from the source material clouding your
perception.

## The Sorcerer

This section provides suggestions and insights into how to translate the
ideas of the Sorcerer class from the source material into Pathfinder
Fate Accelerated.

:::flavor
\"Scions of innately magical bloodlines, the chosen of deities, the
spawn of monsters, pawns of fate and destiny, or simply flukes of fickle
magic, sorcerers look within themselves for arcane prowess and draw
forth might few mortals can imagine.

Emboldened by lives ever threatening to be consumed by their innate
powers, these magic-touched souls endlessly indulge in and refine their
mysterious abilities, gradually learning how to harness their birthright
and coax forth ever greater arcane feats.

Just as varied as these innately powerful spellcasters\' abilities and
inspirations are the ways in which they choose to utilize their gifts.

While some seek to control their abilities through meditation and
discipline, becoming masters of their fantastic birthright, others give
in to their magic, letting it rule their lives with often explosive
results.\"
:::

:::sidebar
#### Sample Iconics

[Ilsa](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Ilsa/Ilsa.aspx),
[Voxel](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Voxel/Voxel.aspx),
[Royce](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Royce/Royce.aspx)
:::

:::sidebar
#### Starting Archetype Sets

**Eldritch**: Arcane +4

**Cryptic**: Arcane +3, Roguish +1

**Spellblade**: Arcane +3, Combative +1

**Primordial**: Arcane +3, Primal +1
:::

### Archetype Considerations

**Arcane** is the only Archetype a sorcerer has to concern themselves
with; everything else is optional.

To be considered a sorcerer (and not some other hybrid concept), a
character should start with at least **Arcane** +3.

**Arcane** +3 allows unrestricted spell casting using the [simple magic
guIdeliNes](#simple-magic-guidelines), which you should read first if
you are serious about playing a spellcaster. Free casting is the norm in
Pathfinder Fate Accelerated, so there is no need to concern yourself
with \"known spells\".

For a standard starting character, this leaves only the decision of
where to put the final +1.

A hyper-specialized, dedicated sorcerer will go all in on **Arcane** +4,
but putting a +1 into one of the other Archetypes goes a long way
towards suggesting a more interesting background for the character.

**Roguish** +1 is a great choice for a resourceful sorcerer who knows
their way around civilized lands, has some people skills, and is
familiar with the use of daggers, crossbows, slings, and the like.

**Combative** +1 is a great choice for a sorcerer who knows which end of
a weapon to point towards an enemy. It also opens the door to becoming a
**magus** or something similar later on.

**Primal** +1 is a less common choice overall, but could make perfect
sense for sorcerers of certain bloodlines.

For instance, the aquatic bloodline, boreal bloodline, fey bloodline,
elemental bloodline, and verdant bloodline each requires **Primal** +1.

**Focused** +1 is a very solid and safe choice for an adaptable
sorcerer. Also, it goes well with bloodlines that offer innate physical
or esoteric abilities.

For instance, the imperious and destined bloodlines require **Focused**
+1.

**Divine** +1 is perhaps the most unusual choice, and would most likely
be taken purely for concept reasons or something like the celestial
bloodline.

### Approach Considerations

Sorcerers are diverse, and thus all Approaches are equally viable,
depending upon what sort of sorcerer is being represented. Sorcerers are
ultimately great individualists, and thus they defy easy stereotyping.
Having said that, many sorcerers are **Flashy** with their overt magic
and strange bloodlines.

Blasting sorcerers will tend to favor **Flashy** or **Forceful**, while
the more charming sort opt for **Sneaky** or **Clever**.

Some sorcerers are **Careful**, or **Quick** but not in any
statistically normative ways.

### What Kind Of Sorcerer, Exactly?

Generally speaking, when defining a character in Pathfinder Fate
Accelerated that you envision falling into the sorcerer category, you
might start out by asking yourself the following questions:

1.  What role do I want my sorcerer to fill?
2.  Does my sorcerer have a bloodline, and if so how significant is the
    bloodline overall?
3.  Does my sorcerer focus more on spellcasting or on other abilities?
4.  Is my sorcerer a swiss army knife spellcaster or does their magic
    have a theme?

#### Role?

A sorcerer can be individualized to fill a variety of roles, and you get
to decide what role you want your sorcerer to attempt to fill.

You might intend for your sorcerer to be optimized for conflicts. Or
perhaps you want to play more of a smooth operator who opts for more
subtle resolutions via stealth, guile, and / or charm. Or you might want
your sorcerer to be a problem-solver or \"support\" character who is
either specialized to address a particular niche or generalized to have
a broad range of \"utility\" allowing them to adapt to emerging
challenges that the group might face in their adventures. And of course,
your sorcerer might attempt to fill more than one role or not be
intentionally designed to fit any particular role as you prefer.

::: {.Example}
[Voxel](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Voxel/Voxel.aspx) is a
cryptic cypher who reveals little of what he is actually thinking,
possesses an imperative air of command with expectations of immediate
obedience, and shows a callous disregard for the feelings of others.

Voxel\'s arcane mastery is impressive; he focuses his magic via Words of
Power uttered by his darkly mellifluous voice, and few things can stand
between him and his goals for long. Voxel is a leader, not a follower,
and he knows how to get things done. He takes no more risks than are
necessary, but he is well prepared for conflict. Voxel is also well
practiced at influencing the minds of others as necessary to get what he
wants.
:::

#### Bloodline Or No Bloodline?

You should decide if you want your character to have bloodline oriented
abilties, or drop the concept altogether as you prefer.

If you do want to incorporate a bloodline concept into your sorcerer,
you can use one of the bloodlines described in the [source
material](http://www.d20pfsrd.com/classes/core-
classes/sorcerer/bloodlines) for inspiration or come up with your own
idea.

If you do opt for a bloodline, it will probably influence your High
Concept.

You may also want to anchor your bloodline concept with at least one
Stunt. Alternately you might choose one of the [bloodline
stunts](#bloodline-stunts) provided as examples, which bundle thematic
Stunts together.

And finally, you might also incorporate your bloodline into your
Trouble; for instance a person of Abyssal bloodline might experience
complications in their life.

::: {.Example}
[Ilsa](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Ilsa/Ilsa.aspx) is a
survivor of the **Worldwound**, descended from a once mighty family of
lost **Sarkoris**, and inheritor of potent boreal magics with a deep
affinity for cold and ice.

Ilsa\'s people have fought tirelessly in the ensuing years in the
Mendevian Crusades, vainly struggling to push back the tide of evil
seeping into the world.

The wars have ground her family to dust and bones; Ilsa is the last
alive and she has had enough, abandoning the futile dream and seeking a
new future elsewhere.
:::

#### Pure Spellcaster Or Thematic Hybrid?

The third question is about refining your character concept; it will
mostly influence your choice of Archetypes and your Stunt selections.

If a bloodline is an important part of your character concept and you
want to take some thematic abilities as Stunts and perhaps slide a +1
into a Archetype other than **Arcane**, it will make your sorcerer more
interesting and distinctive but it does reduce your sorcerer\'s focus on
spellcasting.

Of course, this decision is relevant even for sorcerers that eshew the
bloodline concept. There are all sorts of interesting directions to
explore with the design of an individual sorcerer, but finding a balance
between spellcasting potency and other abilities is key.

#### Generic Generalist Spellcaster Or Conceptual Specialist?

The fourth question is asking you to think about what kind of spells
your sorcerer can cast. Pathfinder Fate Accelerated doesn\'t impose
restrictions on your spell choices; if your character has a high enough
**Arcane** Archetype you are allowed to attempt to cast any spell you
want unless the GM says no.

However, it can be a lot more rewarding and fun to self-impose a theme
or shtick to your sorcerer and attempt to solve problems while staying
within it. This can inspire you to creativity, and make your sorcerer
seem a lot more interesting. Consider giving it a try.

Alternately you may prefer to have a list of known spells to operate
from for convenience; not everyone is comfortable with coming up with
things on the fly and that\'s ok. Feel free to make a list of known
spells with write-ups and run with it, but remember that it is just a
list of convenience and not a restriction that you can\'t deviate from.

::: {.Example}
[Royce](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Royce/Royce.aspx) is a
dangerously curious trickster, burglar, mountebank, and Gnome-about-town
who uses illusions and deceit in the course of his daring heists and
cons. His inability to do anything in a direct and honest way leads to
all sorts of unlikely misadventures.

While he does know a bare handful of general purpose spells, it is
Royce\'s mastery of illusions that defines his magic use. His illusions
range from the simple to the elaborate, and the ease with which he slips
them into place in the most innocuous of ways makes it very difficult
for any unsuspecting victims to know for sure what is real and what is
not when they are in Royce\'s vicinity.
:::

### Stunts

Sorcerer characters might find the following Stunt categories of
interest: [Arcanist Stunts](#arcanist-stunts), [Special
Stunts](#special-stunts), [Innate Stunts](#innate-stunts), [Bloodline
Stunts](#bloodline-stunts).

The following Stunts are offered as samples that might be relevant for
some sorcerers.

However, the best Stunts are those that are tailor made to fit your
concept, so don\'t hesitate to come up with your own or work with your
GM to define something that is \"just right\" for your character. See
the [Stunt Options](#stunt-options) section for ideas on how to do this.

:::description
**Arcane Aegis**: Because I have mastered protecting myself with magic,
I may use Arcane to defend against physical attacks without needing to
first create an advantage to invoke.
:::

:::description
**Arcane Archery**: Because I am an Arcane Archer, when I am Cleverly
Arcane and use a bow and arrow I get +2 when I attack and the attack is
considered to be magic rather than mundane.
:::

:::description
**Arcane Bolts**: Because I have mastered the art of Arcane Bolts, I
gain +2 when I am Flashily Arcane and attack with ranged magic.
:::

:::description
**Arcane Senses**: Because I have developed my arcane senses to
impressive heights, I may use Arcane instead of Focused to notice or
perceive things and I can sense things that require mystical awareness
to detect.

This stunt requires Arcane +1 or better to use.
:::

:::description
**Chained Lightning**: Because I am able to project a bolt of lighting
that jumps from target to target, once per session when I am Flashily
Arcane and attack I may affect all enemy targets in my zone without
having to split my shifts between them.
:::

:::description
**Fireburst**: Because I am able to cause a mystical explosion to occur,
once per session when I am Flashily Arcane and attack I may affect all
targets in up to two contiguous adjacent zones without having to split
my shifts between them. This is non-discriminatory, and often causes
collateral damage.
:::

:::description
**Hedge Arcanist**: Because I practice a more ancient form of Arcane
magic that remains connected to the natural world, while Arcane I can
cast spells that replicate effects that are usually the province of
Primal. Further, I may also add my Primal capability modifier as a bonus
to my roll when I do so.

This stunt requires Primal +1 or better to use.
:::

:::description
**Heed Me!**: Because I have a magical knack that allows me to augment
my spoken voice with enchanting magics I may use Arcane for social
interactions if I can talk and my target can hear me. I am resisted by
Arcane when I do so. This is a form of mind-affecting magic.

This stunt requires Arcane +1 or better to use.
:::

:::description
**Levitation**: Because I have mastered the art of mystic levitation,
while I am Flashily Arcane I may attempt to overcome a Superb (+5)
difficulty to create the situational Aspect **Levitating** on myself.
While this Aspect is in play I may levitate; while levitating I am
unaffected by obstacles that I can levitate over, and I can hover out of
easy reach of the ground thus frustrating melee attackers. This Aspect
can be overcome by appropriate magic, with a Legendary (+8) difficulty.
I cannot invoke the Aspect for any additional benefit.
:::

:::description
**Reverberation**: Because I know many Words of Power, if I am currently
able to speak as a non-action I may spend a Fate point to utter a Word
and immediately remove from play any one situational Aspect in my zone
or an adjacent zone with a difficulty of Legendary (+8) or less to
overcome. Though there is no 4dF roll involved, I am considered to be
acting in a Flashily Arcane manner when I do this and the reverberations
of the Word are very noticeable.
:::

:::description
**Scroll Scrivener**: Because I have mastered the art of scribing
scrolls, I can be Cleverly Arcane and prepare \'spell completion\' items
as scrolls or similar items for specific spell effects that I can cast.
I can later cast the inscribed spell (using the simple magic system
guidelines) from the item, gaining a bonus in the process. Other
characters with Arcane +1 or better can also use my scrolls. I can also
stockpile unused scrolls, as well as use scrolls inscribed by others.
Unless explicitly denied means and opportunity, I can prepare a number
of new scrolls ready for use equal to my Arcane capability each day.
:::

:::description
**Shocking Touch**: Because I am able to generate a magical paralyzing
shock, I may use Arcane instead of Focused when fighting barehanded or
grappling.
:::

:::description
**Skilled Illusionist**: Because I am skilled at using my illusions to
hide the truth, I get +2 when I am Arcane and create an advantage using
illusion magics to deceive.
:::

:::description
**Spell Turning**: Because I am able to reflect magic to protect myself,
once per scene if I am the target of an Arcane spell and I am aware of
it I may overcome the same difficulty required to cast the spell while
Cleverly Arcane; however I suffer a -2 penalty to my roll. If I am
successful the spell has no effect on me and I turn the spell back upon
its caster, against whom the spell has its full normal effect.
:::

:::description
**Spell Turning (-2)**: Because I am able to reflect magic to protect
myself, once per exchange if I am the target of an Arcane spell and I am
aware of it I may overcome the same difficulty required to cast the
spell while Cleverly Arcane; however I suffer a -2 penalty to my roll.
If I am successful the spell has no effect on me and I turn the spell
back upon its caster, against whom the spell has its full normal effect.
:::

#### Bloodlines

The [Bloodline Stunts](#bloodline-stunts) section contains write-ups are
provided for a handful of bloodlines. It is important to note that these
are not intended as \"the one true way\" to model bloodlines; they are
purely suggestions.

It is entirely possible, and valid, to model bloodlines in different
ways up to and including allowing a High Concept or Aspect to fully
represent all nuances of the idea via a combination of narrative
support, the create advantage action, and fate points.

But, there is much to be gained by opting for a more concrete
representation as well.

Each bloodline bundles together several Stunts and usually one or more
Archetype or Approach requirements. Ideally a character using the
bloodline will take the full set at character creation, but it is also
possible to just cherry-pick individual items.

### Source Material Notes

#### Support / Utility

The source material offers sorcerers as full casting utility characters
with an array of options including buffing, debuffing, and control
spells.

#### Blaster

A sorcerer can serve as a blaster, loading up on ranged damage spells.

There is a point of view among Pathfinder grognards that blasting is not
an optimal strategy for a full arcane caster, but it can be a fun way to
go nonetheless and it is the rare sorcerer who doesn\'t have at least
one or two ranged damage spells.

#### Bloodlines

Sorcerers are able to choose a bloodline in the source material, from
which their innate magical abilities manifests. Each bloodline offers
some thematic abilities, and they provide a significant way to
individualize sorcerers.

#### Diverging From Source Material

The sorcerer is a solid and flexible class in the source
material\...indeed, it is often considered to be among the most powerful
base classes in the game. But Pathfinder Fate Accelerated offers even
more flexibility to personalize your sorcerer to make a character that
is as distinctive as they are capable.

Free casting is the default in Pathfinder Fate Accelerated, so there is
no need to worry about \"known spells\" for your sorcerer. Decide what
kind of effects are appropriate for your sorcerer to cast, and
self-police on any urges to cast spells that don\'t make sense per your
character\'s shtick.

You are free to personalize your sorcerer with abilities suited to a
concept such as a bloodline. As a player interested in expressing their
creativity you should first check with your GM to determine what they
will and wont allow.

You can also opt to dispense with the idea of a bloodline altogether,
and just make a straight up arcane spellcaster with no frippery.

#### Bloodlines as charcter concepts

The source material added in the concept of bloodlines to differentiate
sorcerers from wizards, and to round out the class with interesting
thematic abilities. This addition made sense, as the idea of bloodlines
is internally consistent with the source material\'s premise that
sorcerers are born with an inherited connection to magic.

The addition of sorcerous bloodlines in the source is a feature that
offers a mechanical solution to a class differentiation problem, and
also a conceptual solution by anchoring a premise that was previously
stated to be true in D&D 3e but was meaningless as anything other than a
roleplaying suggestion due to being pure fluff.

In Pathfinder Fate Accelerated the mechanical impetus for bloodlines
offers no relevance or benefit.

This leaves only the conceptual facet of bloodlines, and thus the
decision to incorporate a bloodline into your character is one based
entirely upon your character concept.

If a particular bloodline helps you to realize your character concept,
take it.

If the bloodline idea is not relevant to your character concept, ignore
the entire idea of bloodlines and make the character you want to play.

## The Summoner

This section provides suggestions and insights into how to translate the
ideas of the Summoner class from the source material into Pathfinder
Fate Accelerated.

:::flavor
\"While many who dabble in the arcane become adept at beckoning monsters
from the farthest reaches of the planes, none are more skilled at it
than the summoner. This practitioner of the arcane arts forms a close
bond with one particular outsider, known as an eidolon, who gains power
as the summoner becomes more proficient at his summoning.

Over time, the two become linked, eventually even sharing a shard of the
same soul. But this power comes with a price: the summoner\'s spells and
abilities are limited due to his time spent enhancing the power and
exploring the nature of his eidolon.\"

From the perspective of Pathfinder Fate Accelerated, summoners are just
arcane spellcasters with an extra-fancy familiar.

Therefore, it is recommended that players interested in making a
summoner type character refer to the [the Sorcerer](#the-sorcerer) or
[the Wizard](#the-wizard) or [the Witch](#the-witch) as a baseline, and
allocate some number of Stunt slots towards having a companion.
:::

:::sidebar
#### Starting Archetype Sets

**Eldritch**: Arcane +4
:::

### Archetype Considerations

The only Archetype a summoner needs is **Arcane**, and there isn\'t a
lot of thematic reason for them to splash one of the other Archetypes
for anything other than concept.

### Approach Considerations

**Careful** and **Sneaky** are useful Approaches for summoners.

Summoners are Charisma based in Pathfinder, so **Flashy** might suggest
itself thematically.

**Clever**, **Quick**, and **Forceful** are all equally viable
secondaries.
:::

### Stunts

See the [the Sorcerer](#the-sorcerer) class translation and [the
Wizard](#the-wizard) class translation and [the Witch](#the-witch) class
translation for a selection of relevant arcanist feats.

The following Stunts might be of interest to a summoner.

:::description
**Companion\'s Senses**: Because I share a mystical bond with my animal
companion, I may spend a Fate point to share their senses for a scene at
a range of a few dozen miles. This allows me to witness events through
the senses of my companion as if I were present. This can be detected by
others with appropriate senses as a Quick + Primal overcome action vs a
Fantastic (+6) difficulty.
:::

:::description
**Skilled Conjurer**: Because I am skilled at using conjurations for
summoning minions to do by bidding, I get +2 when I am Arcane and
overcome using conjuration magic to summon a servitor.
:::

#### Companions

Summoners have an eidolon, which is a powerful companion; see the
[Companions](#companions-5) section for details on how to incorporate
companions into your character using Stunts.

The sample Animal Companion below demonstrates the starting baseline for
such a companion at the cost of three Stunt slots; however as described
in the [Companions](#companions-5) section, it is possible to allocate
even more Stunt slots to such a companion to make them more powerful.

:::description
**Animal Companion (-3)**: Because **\[describe the reason you have an
animal companion\]**, I have attracted a powerful animal companion that
chooses to aid me.

:::description
###### Animal Companion

**Aspects**

-   Select two.

**Good At**

-   Spread +4 around 1 to 4 skill-like abilities

**Bad At**

-   Spread -4 around 1 to 4 skill-like abilities

**Stress**

-   \[1\]\[2\]\[3\]
-   Mild (2)
-   Moderate (4)
:::
:::

### Source Material Notes

#### Diverging From Source Material

Unlike the core classes which have some amount of prior existence or
precedence in D&D lore, the Summoner class was created wholesale for
Pathfinder.

The name might suggest some kind of specialist in **Conjuration**
magics, and that is true in a broad sense. However, the Summoner class
goes further and offers a concept called an **eidolon**, which is a sort
of build-your-own pocket monster.

It is relatively easy to make very powerful combat capable eidolons, and
to further abuse the rules via some \"archetypes\" (as defined in the
Pathfinder rulebooks) and feats to produce what many consider to be a
grossly overpowered character. So much so that some GM\'s outright ban
the Summoner class from their games.

Further, as Summoners were introduced later the class is not well
integrated into the default setting of Golarion overall, (though there
are a few exceptions), which leaves it rather weak from a fiction
perspective.

As Pathfinder Fate Accelerated is far more concerned with concepts than
mechanics, the concept of Summoners offers little to distinguish itself
from the basic idea of a arcane caster with a really pumped up familiar.
However, individual players and GM\'s can overcome this by finding ways
to more seamlessly integrate the Summoner concept into their campaigns
if they so desire.

## The Witch

This section provides suggestions and insights into how to translate the
ideas of the Witch class from the source material into Pathfinder Fate
Accelerated.

:::flavor
\"Some gain power through study, some through devotion, others through
blood, but the witch gains power from her communion with the unknown.
Generally feared and misunderstood, the witch draws her magic from a
pact made with an otherworldly power.

Communing with that source the witch gains not only a host of spells,
but a number of strange abilities known as hexes. As a witch grows in
power, she might learn about the source of her magic, but some remain
blissfully unaware. Some are even afraid of that source, fearful of what
it might be or where its true purposes lie.

While many witches are recluses, living on the edge of civilization,
some live within society, openly or in hiding. Some witches travel
about, seeking greater knowledge and better understanding of their
mysterious powers.\"
:::

The advice given in [the Sorcerer](#the-sorcerer) or [the
Wizard](#the-wizard) (if you prefer the **Prepared Casting** model)
class translation sections is directly relevant to witches, and you
should refer to them for general ideas. This section concentrates on
content that might be of particular interest to witches.

::: {.Example}
[Ruelga](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Ruelga/Ruelga.aspx) is
an enchantingly beautiful Jadwiga hailing from the land of Irrisen, but
has left the cold and barren hills of her birth to find a life apart
from her twisted family and pursue her own studies into the nature of
magic.

Older than she seems, Ruelga is a descendant of the legendary Baba Yaga,
and heir to ancient and somewhat primitive but dangerously insidious
magics.
:::

:::sidebar
#### Sample Iconics

[Ruelga](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Ruelga/Ruelga.aspx),
[Tamara](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Tamara/Tamara.aspx),
[Moek](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Moek/Moek.aspx)
:::

:::sidebar
#### Starting Archetype Sets

**Eldritch**: Arcane +4

**Wisdom**: Arcane +3, Primal +1

**Mystic**: Arcane +1, Primal +3
:::

### Archetype Considerations

Technically, the only Archetype a witch needs is **Arcane**. However, a
lot of the abilities normally proscribed to witches in fiction fall
between **Arcane** and **Primal**.

Thus, it is recommended (but not required) that you at least consider
splashing **Primal**.

#### Labels

Witch is both a concept and a label. Feel free to use a different term
for your character if you wish. Whether your character calls themselves
witch, warlock, wyrd, shaman, wise man, or whatever is up to you.

::: {.Example}
[Moek](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Moek/Moek.aspx) was a
spirittalker of the proud Kaurannock, a tribe of far off Arcadia.
However his village was raided and he, along with many others, were
taken by Chelaxian slavers.

After a harrowing series of travails that resulted in most of those
taken from his village dying of hardships and the rest scattered to
different buyers, Moek eventually found himself on the other side of the
world where he was put on display in a carnivale along with other
\"curiosities\" as an example of an \"Arcadian Savage\" for the
amusement of decadent Chelaxians. But after some weeks of this
debasement his new owners eventually grew lax, and Moek was able to
affect an escape.

He now finds himself alone in a strange land, with nothing but his
magic.
:::

### Patrons

The source material has the concept of very vaguely defined witch
\"patrons\" which putatively are the source of a witch\'s abilities.
This is a rather odd conceit from a fiction standpoint, and mechanically
primarily serves to offer specific spells that are not normally on the
witch spell list. It means nothing in Pathfinder Fate Accelerated terms
due to the lack of spell lists and thus this idea can be dropped
entirely, or incorporated into a character\'s concept via Aspects and /
or Stunts as you prefer. A patron might even manifest itself in a
character\'s Trouble, if it compels their behavior.

::: {.Example}
[Tamara](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Tamara/Tamara.aspx) is
a seithr of the Linnorm lands consumed by **vengeance**. Beautiful and
used to getting what she wants, Tamara takes it personally when she does
not, and has a tendency to act on her frustrations. She reserves her
greatest ire for those who have spurned her, however.

Accordingly she has left the land of her birth to hunt down and punish
the loutish Linnorm warrior Leofric Haversen who had the temerity to
reject Tamara\'s overtures of wedlock, and then added to the offense by
fleeing to warmer climes to get away from her. Such an insult cannot go
unanswered.
:::

### Stunts

Witch characters might find the following Stunt categories of interest:
[Arcanist Stunts](#arcanist-stunts), [Primordial
Stunts](#primordial-stunts), [Alchemy Stunts](#alchemy-stunts),
[Bloodline Stunts](#bloodline-stunts), [Special
Stunts](#special-stunts).

The following Stunts might be of particular interest to a Witch.

#### Hexes and Charms

Some witches have one or more spell-like magical abilities.

:::description
**Disenchant**: Because I am adept at dispelling persistent magical
effects, I gain +2 while Arcane to overcome situational Aspects put into
play via any kind of magic.
:::

:::description
**Evil Eye**: Because I can hex others with the power of the Evil Eye, I
gain +2 while Arcanely creating advantage to attach the spell Aspect
**The Eye Is Upon You** to a person or creature in my zone that I can
see. This spell Aspect lasts until it has no more invokes remaining or
it is overcome. Anyone in the scene may invoke this Aspect to penalize
or interfere with the target\'s actions.
:::

:::description
**Bestow Curse**: Because I am skilled at afflicting others with curses,
I get +2 while Arcanely creating advantage by using my magic to put a
situational Aspect representing a curse or other temporary magical
impediment on a living sentient person or creature. The difficulty to
overcome one of my curses with appropriate magic is equal to my (Arcane
+ Primal) bonuses; the target can also overcome the curse themselves
while Carefully Focused but the difficulty is +1 higher. There is no
zone restriction on this ability, but I must be able to see my target,
and I cannot move zones in the same exchange that I use this ability.
:::

:::description
**Spell Turning**: Because I am able to reflect magic to protect myself,
once per scene if I am the target of an Arcane spell and I am aware of
it I may overcome the same difficulty required to cast the spell while
Cleverly Arcane; however I suffer a -2 penalty to my roll. If I am
successful the spell has no effect on me and I turn the spell back upon
its caster, against whom the spell has its full normal effect.
:::

:::description
**Spell Turning (-2)**: Because I am able to reflect magic to protect
myself, once per exchange if I am the target of an Arcane spell and I am
aware of it I may overcome the same difficulty required to cast the
spell while Cleverly Arcane; however I suffer a -2 penalty to my roll.
If I am successful the spell has no effect on me and I turn the spell
back upon its caster, against whom the spell has its full normal effect.
:::

:::description
**Levitation**: Because I have mastered the art of mystic levitation,
while I am Flashily Arcane I may attempt to overcome a Superb (+5)
difficulty to create the situational Aspect **Levitating** on myself.
While this Aspect is in play I may levitate; while levitating I am
unaffected by obstacles that I can levitate over, and I can hover out of
easy reach of the ground thus frustrating melee attackers. This Aspect
can be overcome by appropriate magic, with a Legendary (+8) difficulty.
I cannot invoke the Aspect for any additional benefit.
:::

:::description
**Spell Mastery (Hideous Laughter)**

Because I have mastered the **Hideous Laughter** spell, whenever I am
being Arcane and gain a boost I may use that boost to add two (2)
additional free invokes to any **Hideous Laughter** situational Aspects
that I have put into play (if any).

:::description
###### Hideous Laughter

Arcane Spell (Enchantment), Compulsion, Mind-Affecting

Create advantage while Flashily Arcane vs an Average (+1) difficulty to
create a spell Aspect on a target within my zone or an adjacent zone
called **Hideous Laughter!** for one (1) scene or until all invocations
are used.

While this Aspect is active the victim is afflicted with fits of
uncontrollable laughter, falling prone and becoming unable to attack or
create advantage or move while madly laughing.

Anyone attacking or acting against the target may invoke this Aspect
against the victim to take advantage of their condition.

This spell only affects living, sentient targets.
:::
:::

:::description
**Sudden Slumber**: Because I have mastered a magical talent from olden
times, once per session I can put any number of nameless mooks who lack
consequence slots in my zone or an adjacent zone to sleep. I may affect
additional contiguous zones by spending a Fate point per additional
zone. To do this I must use Carefully Arcane to create the advantage
**Sleep Now My Pretties** against an Average (+1) difficulty. Those
affected will sleep artificially deeply, and resist being woken for the
remainder of the scene; someone trying to wake a victim must overcome a
difficulty equal to Average (+1) plus my margin of success.
:::

:::description
**Willful Invisibility**: Because I can turn invisibile at will, if I do
not attack or create advantage in an exchange I may place the
situational Aspect **\'Invisible\'** on myself as a free action that
takes no time before or after my normal action. If I attack or create
advantage while invisible, this Aspect is immediately removed and I
become visibile for at least one (1) exchange before I am able to use
this ability to become invisible again. My innate invisibility can be
temporarily neutralized by those with unusual senses or magic or special
items creating an applicable advantage; the difficulty to do so is
Superb (+5). It can also be overcome and thus removed by some abilities
that explicitly counter invisibility or dispel magic; the difficulty to
do so is Fantastic (+6).
:::

:::description
**Will To Power**: Because my will to push forward to victory is
absolute, once per session I may gain +4 when attempting to overcome any
one (1) situational Aspect in my zone or an adjacent zone.
:::

:::description
**Witch\'s Fire**: Because I can sicken others with magical energies,
while Flashily Arcane I suffer a -1 penalty to attack one or more
targets in my zone with a blast of eerie mystical energies, but if I
split shifts between multiple targets the targets each suffer a -1
penalty to defend against my attack. If I succeed with style against any
of the targets in all cases I must reduce the stress to get a boost, but
the boost is automatically upgraded to the situational Aspect
**Sickened** with two (2) invokes, which is attached to the affected
target. This Aspect is automatically invoked at the beginning of
subsequent exchanges to inflict two (2) stress to the target per invoke
as the magical attack continues to linger; the target cannot defend
against this additional stress but may apply any resistances or
protection they have such as damage reduction or immunity to magic.
:::

#### Bubble Bubble Toil & Trouble

Some witches make potions, poultices, poisons, or other such
concoctions. They might even make some stuff that\'s a little more
directly dangerous. Also, some witches are immune to poisons.

:::description
**Prepared Caster (Alchemy Dabbler)**

Because I am a capable dabbler in the esoteric science of Alchemy, given
time and opportunity I may \'prepare\' a number of potions, elixirs,
salves and similar \'concoctions\' equal to \[(Careful +
Arcane)\]{.no-wrap}.

Unused concoctions remain until they get activated or destroyed and can
be stockpiled. These Aspects are portable; \[I may\]{.no-wrap} give them
to others and they can be taken away from me.

Making a concoction requires time, materials, and either a lab or a
field kit; the specifics are left to the GM\'s discretion, but simple
potions might take minutes while very powerful potions might take one or
more hours.

If a strict economy is being enforced in the campaign, it usually costs
about half retail price to make a concoction; GM\'s discretion applies.

To prepare a concoction I roll 4dF and add Arcane against a Mediocre
(+0) difficulty; failure indicates a botched concoction and that
\'slot\' is wasted for the day. I temporarily gain a new personal Aspect
corresponding to the concoction I prepared with **one invoke, and
annotated with the margin of success**.

Prepared concoctions are activated by invoking its Aspect as an action
and resolving the effect of the concoction using the previously rolled
margin of success. It is possible for a concoction resolution to fail if
the margin of success is insufficient to the difficulty or if opposed
successfully. If I am the activator, I can spend a Fate point at this
time to add +2 shifts to the margin of success.

This stunt requires Arcane +1 or better to use.

*Commodities*

Alchemical concoctions can be given, sold to, or stolen by others and
used by them. They are effectively a commodity.

However all of an alchemist\'s concoctions, including those under
another character\'s control, count against their preparation limit.

*Alchemical Item Write-ups*

A variety of write-ups for \[sample alchemical items\] and \[sample
potions\] are available. Each usage of these kinds of alchemical items
counts against an alchemist\'s preparation limit.

Note that the provided write-ups are just examples, and not a restricted
list of allowed effects; an alchemist can make any sort of alchemical
item the GM allows.
:::

:::description
**Potions, Poultices, Poisons**: Because I know ancient lores from more
primitive times, I am able to brew potions, poultices, and poisons that
can harm and heal and work odd and subtle magics on those who imbide
them. I can be Cleverly Arcane and make substances that replicate
effects that are usually the province of Primal. At any given time I can
have a number of substances brewed up and ready for use equal to my
Arcane + Primal capability.

This stunt requires Arcane +1 or better to use.
:::

:::description
**Alchemical Bombs**: Because of my alchemical studies I am able to
create and then later throw alchemical bombs.

When I am Cleverly Focused I gain +1 to throw a bomb into my zone or an
adjacent zone, generally against an Average (+1) difficulty.

If I am successful, my bomb explodes and inflicts a number of shifts of
damage equal to my (Careful + Arcane) against every target in the zone
without splitting shifts between them. This is non-discriminatory, and
often causes collateral damage.

For a given session I can carry around and use a number of alchemical
bombs equal to my (Clever + Arcane). Other people can not catalyze my
bombs, they are only usable by me.

This stunt requires Arcane +1 or better to use. :::
:::

:::description
**Immune To Poison**: Because I am immune to poison, I am unaffected by
any malign effect that relies on poison.
:::

#### Bewitching

Some witches excel at charming or controlling the minds or emotions of
others, particularly the weak willed. And some are also good at
protecting their own mind and emotions from the abilities of others.

:::description
**Arcane Domination (-2)**: Because of my mastery of mind-affecting
enchantments, while I am Forcefully Arcane I can make mental attacks
against a living target in my zone or an adjacent zone. Consequences
inflicted by this ability pertain to my gaining increasing control over
the target\'s mind. If the target concedes to me, the target must do as
I command in general but retains enough control to avoid doing anything
fundamentally against the target\'s nature. If the target is taken out
with this ability I assume full control of the target\'s behavior until
they are able to recover from the Consequences.
:::

:::description
**Enchanting Beauty**: Because I am adept at using subtle enchantments
to magically enhance my beauty, I may add my Arcane capability as a
bonus to any social interaction where my appearance can be a factor;
however this can be resisted by Arcane and is a Mind-Affecting effect.
:::

:::description
**Enchanting Empathy**: Because I am a master of enchantment magics that
allow me to manipulate the emotional states of others, while I am
Cleverly Arcane I can engage a target in a social conflict and if I
inflict a Consequence I can afflict them with a propensity for a
specific emotion. Consequences such as **Fits Of Uncontrollable Rage**,
**Plunged Into Deep Sadness**, **Gripped By Passionate Love**, and
**Overwhelmed By Euphoric Happiness** incite those afflicted to act out
in ways appropriate to the emotional state I have imposed on them. If,
while I share a scene with the target, a Consequences I have inflicted
with this ability is compelled and the target spends a fate point to
refuse the compel, I gain the fate point immediately.
:::

:::description
**Immune To Mind-Affecting**: Because I am immune to mind-affecting
abilities, I am unaffected by any malign effect that relies on mental
coersion or disorientation.
:::

#### Old Magic

Some witches combine both Arcane and Primal magics, keeping alive a more
ancient tradition of spellcasting that deals in primordial forces,
animism, crude necromancy, and control over the natural world.

:::description
**Hedge Arcanist**: Because I practice a more ancient form of Arcane
magic that remains connected to the natural world, while Arcane I can
cast spells that replicate effects that are usually the province of
Primal. Further, I may also add my Primal capability modifier as a bonus
to my roll when I do so.

This stunt requires Primal +1 or better to use.
:::

:::description
**Living Off The Land**: Because I am adept at surviving off of what
nature offers me, I am always able to find enough food and water to keep
myself and a couple of other people or animals healthy while in
wildlands and rural areas (i.e. above ground and not near a city or
town). Additionally if I\'ve had at least half a day to become familiar
with the terrain in a specific area of wilderness I gain +1 on all
actions while being Primal. How large the area of wilderness might be is
left to the GM\'s discretion, but it should be at least five square
miles.
:::

:::description
**Necromantic Enervation**: Because I am a master of necromancy, I am
able to drain the life energy from others. While I am Sneakily Arcane I
can attack others with \'Life Draining\' spells; in addition to the
stress if I inflict a Consequence on my target I afflict them with
enervation and ennui. Consequences such as **Easily Fatigued**, **Fits
Of Ennui**, **Prone To Depression**, and **Sunk Into A Deep Funk** cause
those afflicted to struggle to motivate and empower themselves, to
unexpectedly lose interest in being active, become unconcerned about
succeeding in their endeavors, and so forth. If a target is taken out in
this way, they die and rise again as an Undead minion that I can control
for the remainder of the scene and possibly longer at the GM\'s
discretion.
:::

:::description
**Wild Shape (-2)**:

Because I have the ability to change into the form of any normal animal
of my choice, I may spend a Fate point to temporarily assume an animal
form. My trappings magically change with me and are unavailable until I
return to my normal form.

When I change forms I move all of my Approach bonuses to a disposition
relevant to the animal form I am assuming, and I move all of my
Archetype bonuses to Focused (leaving all of my other Archetypes at +0).
This lasts for an entire scene unless I choose to return to normal,
which ends the effect. Additionally, I may spend another Fate point to
assume a different animal\'s form, and I do not have to first change
back to normal.

When I change forms I gain an additional Aspect named for the animal
form I have assumed which I can invoke when my current animal form is
relevant, and which can be compelled whenever my animal form or lack of
humanoid anatomy might inconvenience me.

If the animal form I change into has natural weapons I may use Focused
in place of Combatives while in a physical conflict.

If the animal form I change into has an unusual form of movement, such
as the flight of a bird, the running of a wolf, or the swimming of a
shark then I gain that mode of movement while I am in that form as well,
at the GM\'s discretion.

If the animal form I change into has an unusual or extra keen sense,
such as the low light vision of a cat, the olfactory senses of a canine,
or the echolocation of a bat then I gain that sense while I am in that
form as well, at the GM\'s discretion.

This stunt requires Primal +1 or better to use.
:::

#### Familiar

Witches often have animal companions as familiars; see the
[Companions](#companions-5) section for details on how to incorporate
companions into your character using Stunts.

#### Bonded Familiars

Bonded familiars offer a lot of value for their Refresh equivalency, but
also pose a dire threat to their owners should they be killed as their
lifeforce is bound to their owner\'s lifeforce.

:::description
**Familiar (Bonded)**: Because I have a mystical familiar I am always
accompanied by an animal that is particularly smart and capable for its
kind. However, the life force of my familiar is bound to my own. If my
familiar is slain I immediately take a Severe Consequence **Severed
Familiar Bond** and I cannot gain a new familiar until this consequence
has been cleared.

:::description
###### Bonded Familiar

**Aspects**

-   Two (2) Aspects

**Good At**

-   Spread +4 around one to four skill-like abilities

**Bad At**

-   Spread -4 around one to four skill-like abilities

**Stress**:

-   \[1\]\[2\]\[3\]
-   Mild (2)
-   Moderate (4)
:::
:::

#### Proxy Familiars

Proxy familiars offer a lot of value for their Refresh equivalency and
allow their owners to extend the range at which they can use various
abilities, but also pose a challenge to their owners should they be
killed as they are the repository of their owner\'s known spells.

:::description
**Familiar (Proxy)**: Because I have a mystical familiar I am always
accompanied by an animal that is particularly smart and capable for its
kind. However, my familiar is the repository of all my known spells and
if they are killed I cannot cast Arcane spells until I get a replacement
familiar.

:::description
###### Proxy Familiar

**Aspects**

-   Two (2) Aspects

**Good At**

-   Spread +4 around one to four skill-like abilities

**Bad At**

-   Spread -4 around one to four skill-like abilities

**Stress**:

-   \[1\]\[2\]\[3\]
-   Mild (2)
-   Moderate (4)

**Stunts**

-   **Spell Proxy**: My owner can treat targets in the zone that I am in
    as if they were in their zone for purposes of spells and spell-like
    abilities that only affect targets in the caster\'s zone.
:::
:::

The ability to share the senses of a familiar can be useful.

:::description
**Companion\'s Senses**: Because I share a mystical bond with my animal
companion, I may spend a Fate point to share their senses for a scene at
a range of a few dozen miles. This allows me to witness events through
the senses of my companion as if I were present. This can be detected by
others with appropriate senses as a Quick + Primal overcome action vs a
Fantastic (+6) difficulty.
:::

#### Bloodlines

Some witches get their magic from their heritage, inheriting their
powers from an arcane bloodline.

:::description
**Accursed Bloodline (-5)**:

This bloodline requires Primal +1 or better to use.

This bloodline requires Arcane +1 or better to use.

-   **Hedge Arcanist**: Because I practice a more ancient form of Arcane
    magic that remains connected to the natural world, while Arcane I
    can cast spells that replicate effects that are usually the province
    of Primal. Further, I may also add my Primal capability modifier as
    a bonus to my roll when I do so.
-   **Evil Eye**: Because I can hex others with the power of the Evil
    Eye, I gain +2 while Arcanely creating advantage to attach the spell
    Aspect **The Eye Is Upon You** to a person or creature in my zone
    that I can see. This spell Aspect lasts until it has no more invokes
    remaining or it is overcome. Anyone in the scene may invoke this
    Aspect to penalize or interfere with the target\'s actions.
-   **Forbidding Presence**: Because I present a very intimidating and
    stern visage while emanating a frightenting aura, I gain +1 when
    being Flashy and attempting to frighten or demoralize.
-   **Forced Dementia**: Because I have the ability to afflict the minds
    of others with mental confusion and temporary insanity, I gain +1
    while Arcane to create advantage on a foe within my zone to place
    the situational Aspect **Demented Confusion** upon them. The
    recipient may be compelled by the GM or other players to do bizarre
    and illogical (but not suicidal) things. The Aspect lasts for a
    scene but can be overcome via appropriate magic as a Superb (+5)
    difficulty challenge. The recipient themselves can also overcome the
    Aspect while Carefully Focused as a Fantastic (+6) difficulty
    challenge. This is a mind-affecting ability.
-   **Damage Reduction**: Because I am more durable than normal, I
    reduce by one (1) all stress inflicted on me by physical and magical
    attacks.
:::

:::description
**Fey Bloodline (-5)**:

This bloodline requires Sneaky +1 and Primal +1 or better to use.

This bloodline requires Arcane +1 or better to use.

-   **Hedge Arcanist**: Because I practice a more ancient form of Arcane
    magic that remains connected to the natural world, while Arcane I
    can cast spells that replicate effects that are usually the province
    of Primal. Further, I may also add my Primal capability modifier as
    a bonus to my roll when I do so.
-   **Pass Without Trace**: Because of my mastery of the natural world,
    I gain +1 when I am Sneakily Primal while in the wildlands, I am
    unobstructed by undergrowth, and if I take a full move I may move
    three zones instead of two. Finally, tracking me in wildland areas
    is very difficult; those attempting it must overcome a difficulty
    equal to my **((Sneaky + Primal) \* 2)**.
-   **Willful Invisibility**: Because I can turn invisibile at will, if
    I do not attack or create advantage in an exchange I may place the
    situational Aspect **\'Invisible\'** on myself as a free action that
    takes no time before or after my normal action. If I attack or
    create advantage while invisible, this Aspect is immediately removed
    and I become visibile for at least one (1) exchange before I am able
    to use this ability to become invisible again. My innate
    invisibility can be temporarily neutralized by those with unusual
    senses or magic or special items creating an applicable advantage;
    the difficulty to do so is Superb (+5). It can also be overcome and
    thus removed by some abilities that explicitly counter invisibility
    or dispel magic; the difficulty to do so is Fantastic (+6).
:::

:::description
**Wild Shape (-2)**: Because I have the ability to change into the form
of any normal animal of my choice, I may spend a Fate point to
temporarily assume an animal form. My trappings magically change with me
and are unavailable until I return to my normal form.

When I change forms I move all of my Approach bonuses to a disposition
relevant to the animal form I am assuming, and I move all of my
Archetype bonuses to Focused (leaving all of my other Archetypes at +0).
This lasts for an entire scene unless I choose to return to normal,
which ends the effect. Additionally, I may spend another Fate point to
assume a different animal\'s form, and I do not have to first change
back to normal.

When I change forms I gain an additional Aspect named for the animal
form I have assumed which I can invoke when my current animal form is
relevant, and which can be compelled whenever my animal form or lack of
humanoid anatomy might inconvenience me.

If the animal form I change into has natural weapons I may use Focused
in place of Combatives while in a physical conflict.

If the animal form I change into has an unusual form of movement, such
as the flight of a bird, the running of a wolf, or the swimming of a
shark then I gain that mode of movement while I am in that form as well,
at the GM\'s discretion.

If the animal form I change into has an unusual or extra keen sense,
such as the low light vision of a cat, the olfactory senses of a canine,
or the echolocation of a bat then I gain that sense while I am in that
form as well, at the GM\'s discretion.
:::

:::description
**Verdant Bloodline (-5)**:

This bloodline requires Primal +1 or better to use.

This bloodline requires Arcane +1 or better to use.

-   **Hedge Arcanist**: Because I practice a more ancient form of Arcane
    magic that remains connected to the natural world, while Arcane I
    can cast spells that replicate effects that are usually the province
    of Primal. Further, I may also add my Primal capability modifier as
    a bonus to my roll when I do so.
-   **Plant Traits**: Because of my verdant nature, I am immune to
    mind-affecting effects (charms, compulsions, morale effects,
    patterns, and phantasms), paralysis, poison, polymorph, sleep, and
    stun. However I take +1 shift of stress from attacks that rely on
    cold, fire, acid, or are described as being especially effective vs
    plant life.
-   **Pass Without Trace**: Because of my mastery of the natural world,
    I gain +1 when I am Sneakily Primal while in the wildlands, I am
    unobstructed by undergrowth, and if I take a full move I may move
    three zones instead of two. Finally, tracking me in wildland areas
    is very difficult; those attempting it must overcome a difficulty
    equal to my **((Sneaky + Primal) \* 2)**.
-   **Barkskin Knack**: Because I have a minor magical knack, I can
    create advantage while Carefully Primal vs an Average (+1)
    difficulty to apply the Aspect **Barkskin** to myself. While this
    Aspect is active I gain +2 when defending against physical or
    damaging magical attacks. This Aspect may also be invoked to offer
    additional protection when defending from physical or magical harm.
    This Aspect can be overcome and removed as a Superb (+5) difficulty
    by those with Primal +3 or higher.
-   **Entangling Undergrowth**: Because I am a master of natural magics,
    when I am in a rural area with vegetation, while I am Carefully
    Primal I may attempt to overcome a Great (+4) difficulty to cause
    the undergrowth in my zone or an adjacent zone to animate and wrap
    itself around and entangle all targets. See the Entangling
    Undergrowth profile for details. I am immune to this effect.

:::description
###### Entangling Undergrowth

**Aspects**

-   Animated Undergrowth
-   Creeping Vines

**Good At**

-   Entangling (+5)

**Limitation**:

-   An immobile construct anchored to its zone.

**Hits**:

-   \[1\]\[1\]\[1\]\[1\]\[1\]
:::
:::

### Source Material Notes

#### Diverging From Source Material

The witch is a solid and flexible class in the source material. However,
the Pathfinder presentation of a witch is very specific and narrowly
defined from both a fluff and a design perspective, which can present
problems for those who prefer a different spin on the witch concept. But
Pathfinder Fate Accelerated offers a lot more latitude to personalize a
witch\...or warlock, or whatever term you prefer.

##### Prepared Casting vs Free Casting

Free casting is the default in Pathfinder Fate Accelerated, and you are
not required to limit yourself to the prepared caster model unless you
want to.

##### Sorcerer / Wizard / Witch

The mechanical differentiation in the source material between Arcane
primary casters does not exist in Pathfinder Fate Accelerated.

You are free to blend concepts as much as you like and apply whatever
label you want to the result.

## The Wizard

This section provides suggestions and insights into how to translate the
ideas of the Wizard class from the source material into Pathfinder Fate
Accelerated.

:::flavor
\"Beyond the veil of the mundane hide the secrets of absolute power. The
works of beings beyond mortals, the legends of realms where gods and
spirits tread, the lore of creations both wondrous and terrible\-\--such
mysteries call to those with the ambition and the intellect to rise
above the common folk to grasp true might.

Such is the path of the wizard. These shrewd magic-users seek, collect,
and covet esoteric knowledge, drawing on cultic arts to work wonders
beyond the abilities of mere mortals.

While some might choose a particular field of magical study and become
masters of such powers, others embrace versatility, reveling in the
unbounded wonders of all magic.

In either case, wizards prove a cunning and potent lot, capable of
smiting their foes, empowering their allies, and shaping the world to
their every desire.\"
:::

:::sidebar
#### Sample Iconics

[Amarzedrin](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Amarzedrin/Amarzedrin.aspx),
[Javina](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Javina/Javina.aspx),
[Domidar](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Domidar/Domidar.aspx)
:::

:::sidebar
#### Starting Archetype Sets

**Eldritch**: Arcane +4

**Cryptic**: Arcane +3, Roguish +1

**Spellblade**: Arcane +3, Combative +1

**Failed Apprentice**: Arcane +2, Roguish +2

**Gish**: Arcane +2, Combative +2
:::

### Archetype Considerations

**Arcane** is the only Archetype a wizard has to concern themselves
with; everything else is optional.

**Arcane** +3 allows unrestricted spell casting using the [simple magic
guIdeliNes](#simple-magic-guidelines), which you should read first if
you are serious about playing a spellcaster.

However, Pathfinder Fate Accelerated offers the [prepared
casting](#prepared-casting) option for those who prefer the idea of
wizards needing to prepare or memorize a finite number of spells per
day.

To be considered a wizard, a character who is taking the **Prepared
Casting Stunt** should start with at least **Arcane** +2; characters who
prefer to free cast spells should start with at least **Arcane** +3.

Going with **Arcane** +4 is a powerful choice, but splashing another
Archetype also yields benefits and can go a long way towards anchoring
various concepts.

**Roguish** +1 or +2 is a great choice for a resourceful wizard who
knows their way around civilized lands, has some people skills, and is
familiar with the use of daggers, crossbows, slings, and the like.

There is a lot of synergy to be had between **Roguish** and **Arcane**,
and it is hard to go wrong with this choice.

**Combative** +1 or +2 is a great choice for a wizard who knows which
end of a weapon to point towards an enemy. It also opens the door to
becoming a magus or something similar later on.

**Primal** +1 or +2 can work for certain concepts. Primal plus Arcane
lends itself more towards [the witch](#the-witch) and elementalists than
wizards, but something like a \"hedge wizard\" or wise man could work.

**Focused** +1 is a very solid and safe choice for an adaptable wizard.
However **Focused** +2 doesn\'t offer much additional benefit for a
wizard and is probably not worth it for anything other than concept
reasons.

**Divine** +1 or +2 is perhaps the most unusual choice, and would most
likely be taken purely for concept reasons, such as something like the
**Mystic Theurge** idea from the source material.

### Approach Considerations

Almost all wizards are **Clever**, indeed a sharp mind and prodigious
intelligence is a defining characteristic of the concept of wizards.
Many wizards are also **Careful**, preferring to thoroughly study or
ponder and to act with ritualistic precision.

**Abjurers** will tend to favor **Quick** and **Forceful**.

**Conjurers** will tend to favor **Careful** and **Forceful**.

**Diviners** will tend to favor **Careful** and **Sneaky**.

**Enchanters** will tend to favor **Flashy** and **Sneaky**.

**Invokers** will tend to favor **Flashy** and / or **Forceful** and /
or **Quick**.

**Illusionists** will tend to favor **Quick** and **Sneaky**.

**Necromancers** will tend to favor **Careful** and **Sneaky**.

**Transmuters** will tend to favor **Forceful** and **Sneaky**.

### What Kind Of Wizard, Exactly?

Generally speaking, when defining a character in Pathfinder Fate
Accelerated that you envision falling into the wizard category, you
might start out by asking yourself the following questions:

1.  Does my wizard use the Prepared Casting model or not?
2.  Does my wizard focus more on spellcasting or on other abilities?
3.  Is specialization in a school of magic an important facet of my
    wizard?
4.  What role do I want my wizard to fill?

#### Prepared Or Not Prepared?

As mentioned previously, Pathfinder Fate Accelerated allows unrestricted
spell casting using the [simple magic
guIdeliNes](#simple-magic-guidelines). However, the [prepared
casting](#prepared-casting) option is provided for those who prefer the
idea of wizards needing to prepare or memorize a finite number of spells
per day.

You are not required to limit yourself to the prepared casting model
unless you want to. \"Wizard\" is just a label that can be applied to a
character that does not use the prepared casting option as easily as it
can be applied to a character that does. If you decide to go this route,
you might want to check out [the sorcerer](#the-sorcerer) class
translation as well.

If you do decide to use the prepared casting option, there are some
measurable benefits to it. Perhaps most significantly for a starting
character, prepared casters get a large bonus to apply to spells they
have prepared and can thus be quite potent despite their relatively
small number of spells per day.

If you are using the prepared casting model, you might want to look at
some of the write-ups of [sample spells](#sample-spells) to help you
pick a list of known spells.

::: {.Example}
[Amarzedrin](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Amarzedrin/Amarzedrin.aspx)
is a mage who is determined to one day be recognized as an archwizard.
However, he\'s paid a steep price in the number of years spent dedicated
to academic study, and his real-world experience is lacking. Book smart
but not streetwise, his theoretical understanding of the world does not
always withstand the more pragmatic necessities of reality.

Fortunately for Amarzedrin and his allies, his broad education and
diverse studies have provided a plethora of options for solving problems
with\...assuming he prepared the right spell for the problem at hand.
:::

#### Pure Spellcaster Or Thematic Hybrid?

Are you planning to play a dedicated wizard, or do you intend to go for
a hybrid by splashing some wizardly magic onto some other concept. This
decision will mostly influence your choice of Archetypes and your Stunt
selections.

In Pathfinder Fate Accelerated, characters using the Prepared Casting
model do have an edge over free casters when it comes to hybrid
concepts, due to the allowance to cast spells with **Arcane** +2 rather
than needing to have **Arcane** +3 to gain spellcasting.

Even though a prepared caster with **Arcane** +2 does not get very many
spells per day, the spells they do get are reasonably potent.

::: {.Example}
[Domidar](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Domidar/Domidar.aspx)
started life as a wealthy merchant\'s son of unusual intelligence.
Gifted with a princely education and enrollment in the prestigious
College of Mysteries in Absalom, he trained as a wizard for years.

Sadly the winds of fortune blew ill and his family fell into ruin before
Domidar completed his studies. Unable to meet the tuition, Domidar was
forced out into the cruel world with nothing but his unfinished
wizarding training, and his well educated agile mind.

Living since then by his sharp wits, honeyed words, and deniable con
artistry, Domidar walks a wily path always chasing some new scheme to
\'get it all back\'.
:::

#### Specialization Or No Specialization?

In the source material there\'s no good reason for a wizard to not be a
specialist as they gain significant mechanical advantages. However, that
is not true in Pathfinder Fate Accelerated; the choice to specialize or
not is purely a matter of character concept with no mechanical effect.

However deciding to specialize does offer a lot of character development
opportunities, providing a strong theme to build a character around.
Certain specializations also lend themselves better to certain roles,
and thus choosing to incorporate a school specialization will tend to
have an impact on how your character interacts with others and what
niche they are able to fill for an adventuring party.

If you do opt for a specialization, it will probably influence your High
Concept. You will probably also want to anchor your specialization with
at least one Stunt.

Pathfinder Fate Accelerated doesn\'t try to force you to comply with
your own character concept, thus there\'s no such thing as a forbidden
or opposed school. It is entirely up to you whether you want to
incoporate such an idea into your character, and to self-police yourself
to comply with it if you do. However you could incorporate the idea of
an opposed school into your Trouble if you wanted to.

::: {.Example}
[Javina](/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics/Javina/Javina.aspx) is
a young wizardess, a legacy member of the **Pathfinder Society** trained
from childhood by semi-retired adventurer parents.

Particularly skilled at divinations and abjurations, Javina is a capable
and well prepared professional with several successful delves under her
belt. Her magic provides her with a myriad of tools for solving problems
and supporting party members.
:::

#### Role?

Perhaps the most powerful attribute of a universalist wizard, sometimes
known as a **mage**, is that on any given day they can fill just about
any given role. With a wise selection of spells, such a character is the
ultimate toolbox utility character.

Specialists give up some of that flexibility, but gain the benefits of
focusing on particular facets of magic.

**Abjurers** are all about defense and can serve as tanks of a sort,
nullifying magic, repulsing opponents, using globes of invulnerability,
as well as buffing their buddies to be more tankish with various
protective magics. Wards and glyphs also allow an abjurer with time to
set up magical traps.

**Conjurers** excel at summoning minions to serve them, and thus can
potentially fill any role as they can summon up a creature that is
suited to the job at hand. They are particularly adept at vicariously
fulfilling the Striker and Tank roles. A variety of conjuration effects
also provide battlefield control, such as entanglers and large cloud
effects.

**Diviners** excel at gaining information which allows them to make
especially good use of create advantage to discover Aspects. They are
also often able to predict the near future to both avoid attacks as well
as know when and where it is most auspicious to strike.

**Enchanters** can excel as a \"face\", controlling social situations.
They can also use their magics to control sentient opponents, allowing
for a soft form of battlefield control.

**Illusionists** excel at deception and control. Some illusionists can
also use their magic to aid them in social encounters by seeming to be
someone else or altering a mark\'s perception of reality. They can also
manage some battlefield control by tricking opponents into tactical or
strategic blunders.

**Invokers** excel at ranged striking, blasting opponents with powerful
magics. They can also mount a potent defense with walls of force and
similar constructs, and they have excellent battlefield control via
various walls and spells that have large areas of effect.

**Necromancers** excel at debuffs and some buffs (though often of a
grotesque nature). They also often have powerful and insidious attacks,
and can control undead minions to do their bidding.

**Transmuters** are the kings of buffing. They also have a lot of
decisive all-or-nothing effects such as disintegrate and offensive
polymorph spells that have the potential to entirely alter the nature of
an encounter in a single moment.
:::

### Stunts

Wizard characters might find the following Stunt categories of interest:
[Arcanist Stunts](#arcanist-stunts), [Special Stunts](#special-stunts).

The following Stunts are offered as samples that might be relevant for
some wizards.

However, the best Stunts are those that are tailor made to fit your
concept, so don\'t hesitate to come up with your own or work with your
GM to define something that is \"just right\" for your character. See
the [Stunt Options](#stunt-options) section for ideas on how to do this.

#### Arcane Senses

Many (but not all) wizards are amazingly observant and are even able to
see arcane forces, which greatly aids them in their magic.

:::description
**Arcane Senses**: Because I have developed my arcane senses to
impressive heights, I may use Arcane instead of Focused to notice or
perceive things and I can sense things that require mystical awareness
to detect.

This stunt requires Arcane +1 or better to use. :::
:::

#### School Specialization

Some wizards focus on a particular \"school\" or sub-grouping of magic,
developing their skills with such spells to high levels of ability.

:::description
**Diviner\'s Warning**: Because my skills with divination magics are
very advanced, I can use Arcane instead of Focused to notice things that
could harm me and I gain +2 to do so.
:::

:::description
**Skilled Abjurer**: Because I am skilled at using abjurations to
nullify magic, I get +1 when I am Arcane and defend or overcome using
abjuration magic.
:::

:::description
**Skilled Conjurer**: Because I am skilled at using conjurations for
summoning minions to do by bidding, I get +2 when I am Arcane and
overcome using conjuration magic to summon a servitor.
:::

:::description
**Skilled Diviner**: Because I am skilled at using divinations to know
the unknown, I get +1 when I am Arcane and create advantage or overcome
using divination magic.
:::

:::description
**Skilled Enchanter**: Because I am skilled at using enchantments to
bend others to my will, I get +1 when I am Arcane and create advantage
or overcome using enchantment magic.
:::

:::description
**Skilled Illusionist**: Because I am skilled at using my illusions to
hide the truth, I get +2 when I am Arcane and create an advantage using
illusion magics to deceive.
:::

:::description
**Skilled Invoker**: Because I am skilled at using evocations to wreak
mayhem, I get +1 when I am Arcane and attack using evocation magic.
:::

:::description
**Skilled Necromancer**: Because I am skilled at using my necromancy, I
get +1 when I am Arcane and create advantage or attack using necromantic
magic.
:::

:::description
**Skilled Transmuter**: Because I am skilled at using transmutations to
change the fundamental nature of things, I get +1 when I am Arcane and
create advantage or overcome using transmutation magic.
:::

#### Spell Mastery

Some wizards develop their skill with a particular spell to such heights
that they no longer need to prepare it. Additionally, such abilities are
often personalized to suit the wizard\'s style or idiom.

:::description
**Arcane Aegis**: Because I have mastered protecting myself with magic,
I may use Arcane to defend against physical attacks without needing to
first create an advantage to invoke.
:::

:::description
**Arcane Domination (-2)**: Because of my mastery of mind-affecting
enchantments, while I am Forcefully Arcane I can make mental attacks
against a living target in my zone or an adjacent zone. Consequences
inflicted by this ability pertain to my gaining increasing control over
the target\'s mind. If the target concedes to me, the target must do as
I command in general but retains enough control to avoid doing anything
fundamentally against the target\'s nature. If the target is taken out
with this ability I assume full control of the target\'s behavior until
they are able to recover from the Consequences.
:::

:::description
**Arcane Bolts**: Because I have mastered the art of Arcane Bolts, I
gain +2 when I am Flashily Arcane and attack with ranged magic.
:::

:::description
**Chained Lightning**: Because I am able to project a bolt of lighting
that jumps from target to target, once per session when I am Flashily
Arcane and attack I may affect all enemy targets in my zone without
having to split my shifts between them.
:::

:::description
**Disenchant**: Because I am adept at dispelling persistent magical
effects, I gain +2 while Arcane to overcome situational Aspects put into
play via any kind of magic.
:::

:::description
**Enchanting Beauty**: Because I am adept at using subtle enchantments
to magically enhance my beauty, I may add my Arcane capability as a
bonus to any social interaction where my appearance can be a factor;
however this can be resisted by Arcane and is a Mind-Affecting effect.
:::

:::description
**Enchanting Empathy**: Because I am a master of enchantment magics that
allow me to manipulate the emotional states of others, while I am
Cleverly Arcane I can engage a target in a social conflict and if I
inflict a Consequence I can afflict them with a propensity for a
specific emotion. Consequences such as **Fits Of Uncontrollable Rage**,
**Plunged Into Deep Sadness**, **Gripped By Passionate Love**, and
**Overwhelmed By Euphoric Happiness** incite those afflicted to act out
in ways appropriate to the emotional state I have imposed on them. If,
while I share a scene with the target, a Consequences I have inflicted
with this ability is compelled and the target spends a fate point to
refuse the compel, I gain the fate point immediately.
:::

:::description
**Fireburst**: Because I am able to cause a mystical explosion to occur,
once per session when I am Flashily Arcane and attack I may affect all
targets in up to two contiguous adjacent zones without having to split
my shifts between them. This is non-discriminatory, and often causes
collateral damage.
:::

:::description
**Heed Me!**: Because I have a magical knack that allows me to augment
my spoken voice with enchanting magics I may use Arcane for social
interactions if I can talk and my target can hear me. I am resisted by
Arcane when I do so. This is a form of mind-affecting magic.

This stunt requires Arcane +1 or better to use. 
:::

:::description
**Levitation**: Because I have mastered the art of mystic levitation,
while I am Flashily Arcane I may attempt to overcome a Superb (+5)
difficulty to create the situational Aspect **Levitating** on myself.
While this Aspect is in play I may levitate; while levitating I am
unaffected by obstacles that I can levitate over, and I can hover out of
easy reach of the ground thus frustrating melee attackers. This Aspect
can be overcome by appropriate magic, with a Legendary (+8) difficulty.
I cannot invoke the Aspect for any additional benefit.
:::

:::description
**Mana Bolts**: Because I am able to launch target-seeking magical
bolts, when I am Cleverly Arcane and attack I may spend a Fate point
*or* suffer the Mild Consequence **Spell Fatigue** to affect all enemy
targets in an adjacent zone without having to split my shifts between
them.
:::

:::description
**Necromantic Enervation**: Because I am a master of necromancy, I am
able to drain the life energy from others. While I am Sneakily Arcane I
can attack others with \'Life Draining\' spells; in addition to the
stress if I inflict a Consequence on my target I afflict them with
enervation and ennui. Consequences such as **Easily Fatigued**, **Fits
Of Ennui**, **Prone To Depression**, and **Sunk Into A Deep Funk** cause
those afflicted to struggle to motivate and empower themselves, to
unexpectedly lose interest in being active, become unconcerned about
succeeding in their endeavors, and so forth. If a target is taken out in
this way, they die and rise again as an Undead minion that I can control
for the remainder of the scene and possibly longer at the GM\'s
discretion.
:::

:::description
**Reverberation**: Because I know many Words of Power, if I am currently
able to speak as a non-action I may spend a Fate point to utter a Word
and immediately remove from play any one situational Aspect in my zone
or an adjacent zone with a difficulty of Legendary (+8) or less to
overcome. Though there is no 4dF roll involved, I am considered to be
acting in a Flashily Arcane manner when I do this and the reverberations
of the Word are very noticeable.
:::

:::description
**Shocking Touch**: Because I am able to generate a magical paralyzing
shock, I may use Arcane instead of Focused when fighting barehanded or
grappling.
:::

:::description
**Spell Turning**: Because I am able to reflect magic to protect myself,
once per scene if I am the target of an Arcane spell and I am aware of
it I may overcome the same difficulty required to cast the spell while
Cleverly Arcane; however I suffer a -2 penalty to my roll. If I am
successful the spell has no effect on me and I turn the spell back upon
its caster, against whom the spell has its full normal effect.
:::

:::description
**Spell Turning (-2)**: Because I am able to reflect magic to protect
myself, once per exchange if I am the target of an Arcane spell and I am
aware of it I may overcome the same difficulty required to cast the
spell while Cleverly Arcane; however I suffer a -2 penalty to my roll.
If I am successful the spell has no effect on me and I turn the spell
back upon its caster, against whom the spell has its full normal effect.
:::

#### Magical Crafting

To augment and complement their spellcasting some wizards dip into
alchemical arts, while others make an abundance of scrolls, and yet
others craft some other minor magical items.

:::description
**Prepared Caster (Alchemy Dabbler)**

Because I am a capable dabbler in the esoteric science of Alchemy, given
time and opportunity I may \'prepare\' a number of potions, elixirs,
salves and similar \'concoctions\' equal to **(Careful + Arcane)**.

Unused concoctions remain until they get activated or destroyed and can
be stockpiled. These Aspects are portable; \[I may\]{.no-wrap} give them
to others and they can be taken away from me.

Making a concoction requires time, materials, and either a lab or a
field kit; the specifics are left to the GM\'s discretion, but simple
potions might take minutes while very powerful potions might take one or
more hours.

If a strict economy is being enforced in the campaign, it usually costs
about half retail price to make a concoction; GM\'s discretion applies.

To prepare a concoction I roll 4dF and add Arcane against a Mediocre
(+0) difficulty; failure indicates a botched concoction and that
\'slot\' is wasted for the day. I temporarily gain a new personal Aspect
corresponding to the concoction I prepared with **one invoke, and
annotated with the margin of success**.

Prepared concoctions are activated by invoking its Aspect as an action
and resolving the effect of the concoction using the previously rolled
margin of success. It is possible for a concoction resolution to fail if
the margin of success is insufficient to the difficulty or if opposed
successfully. If I am the activator, I can spend a Fate point at this
time to add +2 shifts to the margin of success.

This stunt requires Arcane +1 or better to use.

*Commodities*

Alchemical concoctions can be given, sold to, or stolen by others and
used by them. They are effectively a commodity.

However all of an alchemist\'s concoctions, including those under
another character\'s control, count against their preparation limit.

*Alchemical Item Write-ups*

A variety of write-ups for \[sample alchemical items\] and \[sample
potions\] are available. Each usage of these kinds of alchemical items
counts against an alchemist\'s preparation limit.

Note that the provided write-ups are just examples, and not a restricted
list of allowed effects; an alchemist can make any sort of alchemical
item the GM allows.
:::

:::description
**Scroll Scrivener**: Because I have mastered the art of scribing
scrolls, I can be Cleverly Arcane and prepare \'spell completion\' items
as scrolls or similar items for specific spell effects that I can cast.
I can later cast the inscribed spell (using the simple magic system
guidelines) from the item, gaining a bonus in the process. Other
characters with Arcane +1 or better can also use my scrolls. I can also
stockpile unused scrolls, as well as use scrolls inscribed by others.
Unless explicitly denied means and opportunity, I can prepare a number
of new scrolls ready for use equal to my Arcane capability each day.
:::

#### Strange Magics

Some wizards practice unusual variations or alternate traditions of
arcane magic.

:::description
**Hedge Arcanist**: Because I practice a more ancient form of Arcane
magic that remains connected to the natural world, while Arcane I can
cast spells that replicate effects that are usually the province of
Primal. Further, I may also add my Primal capability modifier as a bonus
to my roll when I do so.

This stunt requires Primal +1 or better to use.
:::

:::description
**Arcane Archery**: Because I am an Arcane Archer, when I am Cleverly
Arcane and use a bow and arrow I get +2 when I attack and the attack is
considered to be magic rather than mundane.
:::

#### Familiar

Wizards sometimes have animal companions as familiars; see the
[Companions](#companions-5) section for details on how to incorporate
companions into your character using Stunts.

Bonded familiars offer a lot of value for their Refresh equivalency, but
also pose a dire threat to their owners should they be killed as their
lifeforce is bound to their owner\'s lifeforce.

:::description
**Familiar (Bonded)**: Because I have a mystical familiar I am always
accompanied by an animal that is particularly smart and capable for its
kind. However, the life force of my familiar is bound to my own. If my
familiar is slain I immediately take a Severe Consequence **Severed
Familiar Bond** and I cannot gain a new familiar until this consequence
has been cleared.

:::description
###### Bonded Familiar

**Aspects**

-   Two (2) Aspects

**Good At**

-   Spread +4 around one to four skill-like abilities

**Bad At**

-   Spread -4 around one to four skill-like abilities

**Stress**:

-   \[1\]\[2\]\[3\]
-   Mild (2)
-   Moderate (4)
:::
:::

Proxy familiars offer a lot of value for their Refresh equivalency and
allow their owners to extend the range at which they can use various
abilities, but also pose a challenge to their owners should they be
killed as they are the repository of their owner\'s known spells.

:::description
**Familiar (Proxy)**: Because I have a mystical familiar I am always
accompanied by an animal that is particularly smart and capable for its
kind. However, my familiar is the repository of all my known spells and
if they are killed I cannot cast Arcane spells until I get a replacement
familiar.

:::description
###### Proxy Familiar

**Aspects**

-   Two (2) Aspects

**Good At**

-   Spread +4 around one to four skill-like abilities

**Bad At**

-   Spread -4 around one to four skill-like abilities

**Stress**:

-   \[1\]\[2\]\[3\]
-   Mild (2)
-   Moderate (4)

**Stunts**

-   **Spell Proxy**: My owner can treat targets in the zone that I am in
    as if they were in their zone for purposes of spells and spell-like
    abilities that only affect targets in the caster\'s zone.
:::
:::

The ability to share the senses of a familiar can be useful.

:::description
**Companion\'s Senses**: Because I share a mystical bond with my animal
companion, I may spend a Fate point to share their senses for a scene at
a range of a few dozen miles. This allows me to witness events through
the senses of my companion as if I were present. This can be detected by
others with appropriate senses as a Quick + Primal overcome action vs a
Fantastic (+6) difficulty.
:::

### Prepared Casting

Pathfinder Fate Accelerated allows free casting by default, but some
players might prefer their wizard to be a Prepared Caster; see [prepared
casting](#prepared-casting) for more information.

### Source Material Notes

#### Support / Utility

The source material offers wizards as full casting utility characters
with an array of options including buffing, debuffing, and control
spells.

#### Blaster

A wizard can serve as a blaster, loading up on ranged damage spells.

There is a point of view among Pathfinder grognards that blasting is not
an optimal strategy for a full arcane caster, but it can be a fun way to
go nonetheless and it is the rare wizard who doesn\'t have at least one
or two ranged damage spells.

In Pathfinder Fate Accelerated, blasting usually amounts to just using
the Arcane Archetype in conjunction with the attack action. Some
characters might also take one or more Stunts related to using Arcane to
attack.

#### Specialization

Wizards are able to choose a school specialization in the source
material, which offers extra spells and thematic benefits related to a
specific \"school of magic\" (Abjuration, Conjuration, Divination,
Enchantment, Evocation, Illusion, Necromancy, Transmutation).

#### Diverging From Source Material

The wizard is a solid and flexible class in the source
material\...indeed, it is often considered to be among the most powerful
base classes in the game. But Pathfinder Fate Accelerated offers even
more flexibility to personalize your wizard to make a character that is
as distinctive as they are capable.

##### Prepared Casting vs Free Casting

Free casting is the default in Pathfinder Fate Accelerated, and you are
not required to limit yourself to the prepared caster model unless you
want to. You can use the free casting model and just apply the
\"wizard\" label.

##### Sorcerer / Summoner / Witch

The mechanical differentiation in the source material between Arcane
primary casters does not exist in Pathfinder Fate Accelerated.

You are free to blend concepts as much as you like and apply whatever
label you want to the result.


# Sample Bestiary

## Animals

In a world populated with mythical, monstrous creatures, natural animals
can still be quite dangerous.

:::description
###### Bear

**Summoning Difficulty**

-   +11

**Aspects**

-   Vast Strength
-   Savage Claws

**Good At**

-   Mauling (+3)
-   Being Tough (+3)

**Bad At**

-   Being Active During Winter (-2)

**Stress**

-   \[1\]\[2\]\[3\]
-   Mild (2)
-   Moderate (4)

**Stunts**

-   **Tough Hide**: Because I have a tough hide I reduce by one (1) all
    stress inflicted on me as damage by physical attacks, and when I
    defend against physical melee attacks and tie my opponent does not
    get a boost.

Bears always fight as individuals.
:::

:::description
###### Boar

**Summoning Difficulty**

-   +7

**Aspects**

-   Ferocity
-   Tusks

**Good At**

-   Goring (+2)
-   Being Tough (+2)

**Bad At**

-   Climbing And Jumping (-2)

**Stress**:

-   \[1\]\[2\]\[3\]
-   Mild (2)

**Stunts**

-   **Tough Hide**: Because I have a tough hide I reduce by one (1) all
    stress inflicted on me as damage by physical attacks, and when I
    defend against physical melee attacks and tie my opponent does not
    get a boost.

Boars generally fight as individuals, particularly male boars. However
up to three (3) may form a mob, with each individual represented by two
(2) stress boxes. Gain +1 to attack and defend for each additional
individual.
:::

:::description
###### Caveigator

**Summoning Difficulty**

-   +7

**Aspects**

-   Ferocity
-   Strong Jaws

**Good At**

-   Climbing And Jumping (-2)

**Stress**:

-   \[1\]\[2\]\[3\]
-   Mild (2)

**Stunts**

-   **Tough Hide**: Because I have a tough hide I reduce by one (1) all
    stress inflicted on me as damage by physical attacks, and when I
    defend against physical melee attacks and tie my opponent does not
    get a boost.

Do not treat as a mob.
:::

:::description
###### Donkey Rat

**Summoning Difficulty**

-   +3

**Aspects**

-   Really Big Rat

**Good At**

-   No Thumbs (-2)

**Hits**

-   \[1\]\[1\] 

Up to three (3) may form a mob. Add two (2) hit boxes per rat. +1 to
attack and defend for each additional rat remaining.
:::

:::description
###### Eagle

**Summoning Difficulty**

-   +1

**Aspects**

-   Regal Raptor
-   Endless Vision

**Good At**

-   No Thumbs (-2)
-   Indoors (-2)

**Hits**

-   \[1\]\[1\]

Do not treat as a mob; eagles always fight as individuals.
:::

:::description
###### Hunting Dog

**Summoning Difficulty**

-   +1

**Aspects**

-   Good Hunter
-   Always Alert

**Good At**

-   Not Growling Or Barking (-1)
-   Knowing When To Run Away (-1)

**Hits**

-   \[1\]\[1\] 

Up to five (5) may form a mob. Add two (2) hit boxes per dog. +1 to
attack and overcome for each additional dog remaining.
:::

:::description
###### Wolf

**Summoning Difficulty**

-   +3

**Aspects**

-   Swift And Cunning Hunter
-   Always Alert

**Good At**

-   Social Interactions (-2)

**Hits**

-   \[1\]\[1\] 

Wolves generally fight as individuals. However up to five (5) may form a
mob. Add two (2) hit boxes per wolf. +1 to attack and create advantage
for each additional wolf remaining.
:::

## Aquatic

:::description
###### Giant Moray Eel

**Summoning Difficulty**

-   +13

**Aspects**

-   Ferocity
-   Big Mouth
-   Aquatic

**Good At**

-   Gnawing (+3)
-   Grabbing (+2)
-   Swimming Fast (+2)

**Stress**

-   \[1\]\[2\]\[3\] 
-   Mild (2)
-   Moderate (4)

**Stunts**

-   **Ambusher**: Because I am so good at ambushing my prey, if I am
    able to surprise an opponent I gain +4 to attack in the first
    exchange.

This sixteen-foot-long eel slithers through the water with uncanny
grace, mouth open to display large teeth and a second set of jaws.

The giant moray eel is a ferocious predator, capable of holding prey in
its primary jaws while a smaller set of jaws inside its throat chews
away bite-sized portions.
:::

:::description
###### Reefclaw

**Summoning Difficulty**

-   +4

**Aspects**

-   Ferocity
-   Pincers
-   Aquatic

**Good At**

-   Snipping (+2)
-   Grabbing (+2)
-   Swimming Fast (+2)

**Bad At**

-   Self Preservation (-4)

**Hits**

-   \[1\]\[1\]

Due to their ferocity, reefclaws fight as individuals. However, multiple
Reefclaws do not coordinate their attacks or cooperate; they mindlessly
attack the most easily reached target.
:::

## Constructs

:::description
###### Thassilonian Sentinel

**Aspects**

-   Looks Like The Head Of A Statue
-   Perceptive
-   Ambushcade

**Good At**

-   Fiery Bolt (+2)
-   Very Pointy Appendages (+2)

**Stress**:

-   \[1\]\[2\]\[3\]
-   Mild (2)
-   Moderate (4)

**Stunts**

-   **Constructed Senses (-2)**: Because I perceive the world via
    magical sensors, I can see perfectly in total darkness, even if I am
    \'blinded\'. Additionally, I can sense invisibile things that are
    near me; I gain +2 to overcome any Aspect related to invisibility or
    a similar effect within my zone.
-   **Constructed Resistances (-4)**: Because I am a construct I am
    immune to death effects, disease, mental effects, paralysis, poison,
    sleep, stun, and energy drain. I also don\'t need to breathe and
    never get tired.
-   **Immune To Magic (-2)**: Because I am immune to almost all magic, I
    am unaffected by any malign effect that relies on magic. The
    exception to this is that I am not immune to magic that explicitly
    affects or manipulates metal (and similar effects), and electricity
    based effects.
-   **Made Of Metal (-2)**: Because I am made of metal, I reduce by 2
    all stress inflicted on me by acid, cold, fire, force, and physical
    attacks. However metal-affecting magics not only ignore this
    resistence, they gain a +2 bonus when used against me.
-   **Still As A Statue**: Because I am able to pose as an ornamental
    statue, unmoving for as long as I care to be, I get +2 when I create
    advantage or overcome challenges to avoid notice if I am immobile
    and posed appropriately. In most scenes, if I am already in an area
    and posed appropriately I will already have the situational Aspect
    **\'Just A Statue\'** on myself which I am assumed to have succeeded
    with style to create and thus have two (2) invokes on it.
-   **Ambusher**: Because I am so good at ambushing my prey, if I am
    able to surprise an opponent I gain +4 to attack in the first
    exchange.
-   **Sentinel Alarum**: Because I am a construct designed to be a
    remote sentinel, when I perceive an intrusion in the area I have
    been programmed to guard, I trigger a telepathic magical alarm which
    alerts my operator to the intrusion, including basic details of the
    intruders.

Do not treat as a mob; each Sentinel acts as an individual.

Cast from metal in the form of a large humanoid head, this creature
perches on six sharp and spidery mechanical legs, its eyes
intermittently shining with an orange glow.

Thassilonian Sentinels cannot be summoned; they must be created via a
time consuming process that is almost entirely lost to history.
:::

## Elementals

Outsiders from the Elemental Planes that animate pure elements of the
material plane. They can be quite dangerous.

:::description
###### Large Air Elemental

**Summoning Difficulty**

-   +19

**Aspects**

-   Elemental Air
-   Fly Like The Wind

**Good At**

-   Moving Air (+6)

**Bad At**

-   Resisting Vacuum (-2)

**Stress**:

-   \[1\]\[2\]\[3\]
-   Mild (2)
-   Moderate (4)
-   Severe (6)

**Stunts**

-   **Immune To Electricity**: Because I am immune to electricity, I am
    unaffected by any malign effect that relies on electricity.
-   **Fast Flyer**: Because I am able to fly very fast, if I do nothing
    but move while flying I may use this ability to move four zones
    instead of two.
-   **Lightning Storm (-3)**: Because of my elemental affinity I am able
    to project an arc of electricity that jumps from target to target.
    Each exchange I gain +4 to attack all enemy targets in my zone or an
    adjacent zone without having to split my shifts between them.
-   **Mundane Reduction**: Because I am extremely resistent to
    non-magical damage, I reduce by two (2) all stress inflicted on me
    by normal mundane weapons and attacks.

Do not treat as a mob.

This large cloud-like creature has dark hollows reminiscent of eyes and
a mouth, and a howling wind whips it into ominous shapes. Moving like a
cyclone, and able to expand and contract itself rapidly at will, this
elemental is fast and dangerous.

Note that the \'Moving Air\' ability bonus applies to any sort of action
that involves air, requiring only narrative justification.
:::

:::description
###### Large Earth Elemental

**Summoning Difficulty**

-   +19

**Aspects**

-   Elemental Earth
-   Move Through The Ground

**Good At**

-   Brickishness (+6)

**Bad At**

-   Resisting Water (-2)

**Stress**:

-   \[1\]\[2\]\[3\]
-   Mild (2)
-   Moderate (4)
-   Severe (6)

**Stunts**

-   **Immune To Acid**: Because I am immune to acid, I am unaffected by
    any malign effect that relies on acid.
-   **Stoney Slam (-3)**: Because I\'m able to slam and bash things with
    my body made of stone; I gain +1 to attack while being Brickish. If
    I get a boost while attacking, I may upgrade the boost to knock my
    target down in the current zone or back into an adjacent zone, and
    also apply the Aspect **Slammed!** with three (3) free invokes on
    it. The target cannot attack, create advantage, or move more than
    one (1) zone until the Aspect is removed; it may be overcome as a
    Good (+3) difficulty and failed attempts to overcome remove an
    invoke.
-   **Stoney Skin**: Because of my elemental affinity I am able to
    protect myself with a stoney skin that shields me from damage, I
    reduce by one (1) all stress inflicted on me by physical and magical
    attacks.
-   **Mundane Reduction**: Because I am extremely resistent to
    non-magical damage, I reduce by two (2) all stress inflicted on me
    by normal mundane weapons and attacks.

Do not treat as a mob.

This hulking, roughly humanoid creature of dirt and stone explodes up
from the earth, faceless save for two glowing gemstone eyes.

Note that Brickishness applies to any action related to being big,
strong, and durable.
:::

:::description
###### Large Fire Elemental

**Summoning Difficulty**

-   +19

**Aspects**

-   Elemental Fire
-   Burn It All Up!

**Good At**

-   Burning (+6)

**Bad At**

-   Resisting Water and Cold (-2)

**Stress**:

-   \[1\]\[2\]\[3\]
-   Mild (2)
-   Moderate (4)
-   Severe (6)

**Stunts**

-   **Immune To Fire**: Because I am immune to fire, I am unaffected by
    any malign effect that relies on fire.
-   **Made Of Fire (-3)**: Because I am made of fire; I gain +1 to
    attack and defend while Burning. If I get a boost while attacking or
    defending in this way, I may upgrade the boost to apply the Aspect
    **On Fire!** with three (3) free invokes on it to the opponent I am
    engaged with. This Aspect is automatically invoked at the beginning
    of each exchange to inflict 2 stress on the victim. It is a Good
    (+3) difficulty to overcome this Aspect.
-   **Summon Fire Elemental**: Because of my elemental affinity, as an
    action I can summon a small fire elemental and command it to serve
    me for a scene. See the Small Fire Elemental profile for details. I
    cannot move in the same exchange that I use this ability.
-   **Mundane Reduction**: Because I am extremely resistent to
    non-magical damage, I reduce by two (2) all stress inflicted on me
    by normal mundane weapons and attacks.

Do not treat as a mob.

This creature looks like a living, mobile bonfire, tongues of flame
reaching out in search of things to burn.

Note that **Burning** applies to any action where fire is relevant.
:::

:::description
###### Large Water Elemental

**Summoning Difficulty**

-   +19

**Aspects**

-   Elemental Water
-   Sublime Swimmer

**Good At**

-   Moving Water (+6)

**Bad At**

-   Resisting Heat & Fire (-2)

**Stress**:

-   \[1\]\[2\]\[3\]
-   Mild (2)
-   Moderate (4)
-   Severe (6)

**Stunts**

-   **Immune To Cold**: Because I am immune to cold, I am unaffected by
    any malign effect that relies on cold.
-   **Fast Swimmer**: Because I am a fast swimmer, I may move an extra
    zone for free when swimming and this does not prevent me from
    attacking. Alternately, if I do nothing but move while swimming I
    may use this ability to move two (2) extra zones.
-   **Watery Slam (-2)**: Because I\'m able to slam and submerge things
    with large quantities of water; if I get a boost while attacking
    while Moving Water, I may upgrade the boost to knock my target down
    in the current zone or back into an adjacent zone, and also apply
    the Aspect **Waterlogged!** with two (2) invokes on it. The target
    cannot attack, create advantage, or move more than one (1) zone
    until the Aspect is removed; it may be overcome as a Good (+3)
    difficulty and failed attempts to overcome remove an invoke.
-   **Summon Water Elemental**: Because of my elemental affinity, as an
    action I can summon a small water elemental and command it to serve
    me for a scene. See the Small Water Elemental profile for details. I
    cannot move in the same exchange that I use this ability.
-   **Mundane Reduction**: Because I am extremely resistent to
    non-magical damage, I reduce by two (2) all stress inflicted on me
    by normal mundane weapons and attacks.

Do not treat as a mob.

This translucent creature\'s shape shifts between a spinning column of
water and a crashing wave.

Note that the \'Moving Water\' ability bonus applies to any sort of
action that involves water, requiring only narrative justification.
:::

:::description
###### Medium Air Elemental

**Summoning Difficulty**

-   +12
:::

**Aspects**

-   Elemental Air, Fly Like The Wind

**Good At**

-   Moving Air (+4)

**Bad At**

-   Sentience (-2), Resisting Vacuum (-2)

**Stress**:

-   \[1\]\[2\]\[3\]
-   Mild (2)
-   Moderate (4)

**Stunts**

-   **Immune To Electricity**: Because I am immune to electricity, I am
    unaffected by any malign effect that relies on electricity.
-   **Fast Flyer**: Because I am able to fly very fast, if I do nothing
    but move while flying I may use this ability to move four zones
    instead of two.
-   **Lightning Storm (-3)**: Because of my elemental affinity I am able
    to project an arc of electricity that jumps from target to target.
    Each exchange I gain +4 to attack all enemy targets in my zone or an
    adjacent zone without having to split my shifts between them.
-   **Mundane Reduction**: Because I am extremely resistent to
    non-magical damage, I reduce by two (2) all stress inflicted on me
    by normal mundane weapons and attacks.

Do not treat as a mob.

This cloud-like creature has dark hollows reminiscent of eyes and a
mouth, and a howling wind whips it into ominous shapes. Moving like a
cyclone, and able to expand and contract itself rapidly at will, this
elemental is fast and dangerous.

Note that the \'Moving Air\' ability bonus applies to any sort of action
that involves air, requiring only narrative justification.
:::

:::description
###### Medium Earth Elemental

**Summoning Difficulty**

-   +12

**Aspects**

-   Elemental Earth
-   Move Through The Ground

**Good At**

-   Brickishness (+4)

**Bad At**

-   Sentience (-2)
-   Resisting Water (-2)

**Stress**:

-   \[1\]\[2\]\[3\]
-   Mild (2)
-   Moderate (4)

**Stunts**

-   **Immune To Acid**: Because I am immune to acid, I am unaffected by
    any malign effect that relies on acid.
-   **Stoney Slam (-3)**: Because I\'m able to slam and bash things with
    my body made of stone; I gain +1 to attack while being Brickish. If
    I get a boost while attacking, I may upgrade the boost to knock my
    target down in the current zone or back into an adjacent zone, and
    also apply the Aspect **Slammed!** with three (3) free invokes on
    it. The target cannot attack, create advantage, or move more than
    one (1) zone until the Aspect is removed; it may be overcome as a
    Good (+3) difficulty and failed attempts to overcome remove an
    invoke.
-   **Stoney Skin**: Because of my elemental affinity I am able to
    protect myself with a stoney skin that shields me from damage, I
    reduce by one (1) all stress inflicted on me by physical and magical
    attacks.
-   **Mundane Reduction**: Because I am extremely resistent to
    non-magical damage, I reduce by two (2) all stress inflicted on me
    by normal mundane weapons and attacks.

Do not treat as a mob.

This hulking, roughly humanoid creature of dirt and stone explodes up
from the earth, faceless save for two glowing gemstone eyes.

Note that Brickishness applies to any action related to being big,
strong, and durable.
:::

:::description
###### Medium Fire Elemental

**Summoning Difficulty**

-   +12

**Aspects**

-   Elemental Fire
-   Burn It All Up!

**Good At**

-   Burning (+5)

**Bad At**

-   Sentience (-2)
-   Resisting Water and Cold (-2)

**Stress**:

-   \[1\]\[2\]\[3\]
-   Mild (2)
-   Moderate (4)

**Stunts**

-   **Immune To Fire**: Because I am immune to fire, I am unaffected by
    any malign effect that relies on fire.
-   **Made Of Fire (-3)**: Because I am made of fire; I gain +1 to
    attack and defend while Burning. If I get a boost while attacking or
    defending in this way, I may upgrade the boost to apply the Aspect
    **On Fire!** with three (3) free invokes on it to the opponent I am
    engaged with. This Aspect is automatically invoked at the beginning
    of each exchange to inflict 2 stress on the victim. It is a Good
    (+3) difficulty to overcome this Aspect.
-   **Mundane Reduction**: Because I am extremely resistent to
    non-magical damage, I reduce by two (2) all stress inflicted on me
    by normal mundane weapons and attacks.

Do not treat as a mob.

This creature looks like a living, mobile bonfire, tongues of flame
reaching out in search of things to burn.

Note that **Burning** applies to any action where fire is relevant.
:::

:::description
###### Medium Water Elemental

**Summoning Difficulty**

-   +12

**Aspects**

-   Elemental Water
-   Sublime Swimmer

**Good At**

-   Moving Water (+4)

**Bad At**

-   Sentience (-2)
-   Resisting Heat & Fire (-2)

**Stress**:

-   \[1\]\[2\]\[3\]
-   Mild (2)
-   Moderate (4)

**Stunts**

-   **Immune To Cold**: Because I am immune to cold, I am unaffected by
    any malign effect that relies on cold.
-   **Fast Swimmer**: Because I am a fast swimmer, I may move an extra
    zone for free when swimming and this does not prevent me from
    attacking. Alternately, if I do nothing but move while swimming I
    may use this ability to move two (2) extra zones.
-   **Watery Slam (-2)**: Because I\'m able to slam and submerge things
    with large quantities of water; if I get a boost while attacking
    while Moving Water, I may upgrade the boost to knock my target down
    in the current zone or back into an adjacent zone, and also apply
    the Aspect **Waterlogged!** with two (2) invokes on it. The target
    cannot attack, create advantage, or move more than one (1) zone
    until the Aspect is removed; it may be overcome as a Good (+3)
    difficulty and failed attempts to overcome remove an invoke.
-   **Summon Water Elemental**: Because of my elemental affinity, as an
    action I can summon a small water elemental and command it to serve
    me for a scene. See the Small Water Elemental profile for details. I
    cannot move in the same exchange that I use this ability.
-   **Mundane Reduction**: Because I am extremely resistent to
    non-magical damage, I reduce by two (2) all stress inflicted on me
    by normal mundane weapons and attacks. Do not treat as a mob.

This translucent creature\'s shape shifts between a spinning column of
water and a crashing wave.

Note that the \'Moving Water\' ability bonus applies to any sort of
action that involves water, requiring only narrative justification.
:::

:::description
###### Small Air Elemental

**Summoning Difficulty**

-   +5

**Aspects**

-   Elemental Air
-   Fly Like The Wind

**Good At**

-   Moving Air (+2)

**Bad At**

-   Sentience (-2)
-   Resisting Vacuum (-2)

**Hits**

-   \[1\]\[1\]

Up to five (5) small elementals can form a mob. Add two (2) stress per
elemental. +1 to create advantage and overcome for every additional
remaining elemental.

Moving like a cyclone, and able to expand and contract itself rapidly at
will, this elemental is fast and dangerous.

Note that the \'Moving Air\' ability bonus applies to any sort of action
that involves air, requiring only narrative justification.

**Stunts**

-   **Immune To Electricity**: Because I am immune to electricity, I am
    unaffected by any malign effect that relies on electricity.
-   **Fast Flyer**: Because I am able to fly very fast, if I do nothing
    but move while flying I may use this ability to move four zones
    instead of two.
-   **Lightning Storm (-3)**: Because of my elemental affinity I am able
    to project an arc of electricity that jumps from target to target.
    Each exchange I gain +4 to attack all enemy targets in my zone or an
    adjacent zone without having to split my shifts between them.
-   **Mundane Reduction**: Because I am extremely resistent to
    non-magical damage, I reduce by two (2) all stress inflicted on me
    by normal mundane weapons and attacks.
:::

:::description
###### Small Earth Elemental

**Summoning Difficulty**

-   +5

**Aspects**

-   Elemental Earth
-   Move Through The Ground

**Good At**

-   Brickishness (+2)

**Bad At**

-   Sentience (-2)
-   Resisting Water (-2)

**Hits**

-   \[1\]\[1\]

**Stunts**

-   **Immune To Acid**: Because I am immune to acid, I am unaffected by
    any malign effect that relies on acid.
-   **Stoney Slam (-3)**: Because I\'m able to slam and bash things with
    my body made of stone; I gain +1 to attack while being Brickish. If
    I get a boost while attacking, I may upgrade the boost to knock my
    target down in the current zone or back into an adjacent zone, and
    also apply the Aspect **Slammed!** with three (3) free invokes on
    it. The target cannot attack, create advantage, or move more than
    one (1) zone until the Aspect is removed; it may be overcome as a
    Good (+3) difficulty and failed attempts to overcome remove an
    invoke.
-   **Stoney Skin**: Because of my elemental affinity I am able to
    protect myself with a stoney skin that shields me from damage, I
    reduce by one (1) all stress inflicted on me by physical and magical
    attacks.
-   **Mundane Reduction**: Because I am extremely resistent to
    non-magical damage, I reduce by two (2) all stress inflicted on me
    by normal mundane weapons and attacks. Up to five (5) small
    elementals can form a mob. Add two (2) stress per elemental. +1 to
    attack and defend for every additional remaining elemental.

Note that Brickishness applies to any action related to being strong,
and durable.
:::

:::description
###### Small Fire Elemental

**Summoning Difficulty**

-   +5

**Aspects**

-   Elemental Fire
-   Burn It All Up!

**Good At**

-   Burning (+3)

**Bad At**

-   Sentience (-2)
-   Resisting Water and Cold (-2)

**Hits**

-   \[1\]\[1\]

**Stunts**

-   **Immune To Fire**: Because I am immune to fire, I am unaffected by
    any malign effect that relies on fire.
-   **Made Of Fire (-3)**: Because I am made of fire; I gain +1 to
    attack and defend while Burning. If I get a boost while attacking or
    defending in this way, I may upgrade the boost to apply the Aspect
    **On Fire!** with three (3) free invokes on it to the opponent I am
    engaged with. This Aspect is automatically invoked at the beginning
    of each exchange to inflict 2 stress on the victim. It is a Good
    (+3) difficulty to overcome this Aspect.
-   **Mundane Reduction**: Because I am extremely resistent to
    non-magical damage, I reduce by two (2) all stress inflicted on me
    by normal mundane weapons and attacks.

Up to five (5) small elementals can form a mob. Add two (2) stress per
elemental. +1 to attack and create advantage for every additional
remaining elemental.

Note that **Burning** applies to any action where fire is relevant.
:::

:::description
###### Small Water Elemental

**Summoning Difficulty**

-   +5

**Aspects**

-   Elemental Water
-   Sublime Swimmer

**Good At**

-   Moving Water (+3)

**Bad At**

-   Sentience (-2)
-   Resisting Heat & Fire (-2)

**Hits**

-   \[1\]\[1\]

**Stunts**

-   **Immune To Cold**: Because I am immune to cold, I am unaffected by
    any malign effect that relies on cold.
-   **Fast Swimmer**: Because I am a fast swimmer, I may move an extra
    zone for free when swimming and this does not prevent me from
    attacking. Alternately, if I do nothing but move while swimming I
    may use this ability to move two (2) extra zones.
-   **Watery Slam (-2)**: Because I\'m able to slam and submerge things
    with large quantities of water; if I get a boost while attacking
    while Moving Water, I may upgrade the boost to knock my target down
    in the current zone or back into an adjacent zone, and also apply
    the Aspect **Waterlogged!** with two (2) invokes on it. The target
    cannot attack, create advantage, or move more than one (1) zone
    until the Aspect is removed; it may be overcome as a Good (+3)
    difficulty and failed attempts to overcome remove an invoke.
-   **Mundane Reduction**: Because I am extremely resistent to
    non-magical damage, I reduce by two (2) all stress inflicted on me
    by normal mundane weapons and attacks.

Up to five (5) small elementals can form a mob. Add two (2) stress per
elemental. +1 to create advantage and attack for every additional
remaining elemental.

Note that the \'Moving Water\' ability bonus applies to any sort of
action that involves water, requiring only narrative justification.
:::

## Humanoids

:::description
###### Boggards

**Summoning Difficulty**

-   +1

**Aspects**

-   Humanoid Frog
-   Atavistically Evil
-   Long Sticky Tongue

**Good At**

-   Being Amphibious (+2)
-   Marsh Fighting (+2)

**Bad At**

-   Complex Thinking (-2)
-   Resisting Blunt Trauma (-2)

**Hits**

-   \[1\]

Up to ten (10) boggards will form a mob. Add one (1) hit box per
boggard. +1 while attacking and defending for every three (3) boggards
remaining.
:::

:::description
###### Derro

**Summoning Difficulty**

-   +9

**Aspects**

-   Insane Aberrant Dwarves
-   Darklands Faction
-   Experimental Pharmacologists and Poisoners

**Good At**

-   Sneaky (+2)
-   Roguish (+3)
-   Arcane (+1)

**Bad At**

-   Cooperating (-2)
-   Being Liked Or Trusted By Others (-2)

**Hits**

-   \[1\]\[1\]

**Stunts**

-   **Darkvision**: Because I have Darkvision I can see perfectly in
    total darkness.
-   **Immune To Mind-Affecting**: Because I am affected by a persistent
    mental condition, I am immune to other forms of insanity and
    Mind-Affecting effects.
-   **Ghost Sound**: Becuase I\'m a derro, I can make illusory sounds up
    to two zones away at will and I can justify create advantage actions
    when illusory sounds are relevant.
-   **Derro Darkness**: Because I am a derro, as an action I have the
    ability to add the situational Aspect **Darkness** to my zone or an
    adjacent zone. This effect provides active Good (+3) defense to
    notice attempts and targeted abilites. This Aspect lasts for four
    exchanges, though it can be overcome and removed by a character with
    Arcane, Divine, or Primal of +3 or higher opposed by a Superb (+5)
    difficulty. Thanks to my Darkvision, I am not affected by this.
-   **Vulnerability To Sunlight (+1)**: Because I am vulnerable to
    bright light, I suffer -1 to all 4dF resolutions while exposed to
    sunlight or other intense light. If exposed to sunlight for more
    than an hour, my \[1\] stress box is considered to be checked at all
    times; I recover from this after being in darkness for at least an
    hour.

Derro are thought to be a myth even by most of the few people who have
heard rumors of them. They are strange small humanoids who are addicted
to a strange fungus that addles their thoughts and fills them with a
kind of mania. Rabidly xenophobic, Derro are sneaky and dangerous foes
that use strange mind-affecting drugs and poisons.

Up to five (5) derro will form a mob. Add two (2) hit boxes per derro.
+1 while attacking and defending for every three (3) derro remaining.
:::

:::description
###### Mites

**Summoning Difficulty**

-   +1

**Aspects**

-   Tiny Blue Fey
-   Vermin Empathy

**Good At**

-   Controlling Vermin (+3)
-   Going Unnoticed (+2)
-   Functioning Underground (+1)

**Bad At**

-   Physical Tasks (-3)
-   Being Taken Seriously (-3)

**Hits**

-   \[1\]

Up to ten (10) mites will form a mob. Add one (1) hit box per mite. +1
while creating advantage and overcoming for every three (3) mites
remaining.
:::

:::description
###### Troglodytes

**Summoning Difficulty**

-   +3

**Aspects**

-   Reptilian Humanoid
-   Cave Dweller

**Good At**

-   Pack Attack (+2)
-   Caves & Underground (+2)

**Bad At**

-   Above Ground (-1)
-   Easily impressed and frightened by bright Flashy magics.

**Hits**

-   \[1\]

Up to ten (10) troglodytes will form a mob. Add one (1) hit box per
troglodyte. +1 while attacking and overcoming for every three (3)
troglodytes remaining.
:::

### Goblins

Considered nothing more than murderous pests by most, goblins dwell on
the fringes of other societies, scavenging amongst their waste and
building their society in squalor. Though weak on their own, goblins
often gather in huge numbers to overwhelm their enemies.

:::description
###### Goblin Dog

**Summoning Difficulty**

-   +2

**Aspects**

-   Foul Beast
-   Cruel and Vicious

**Good At**

-   Biting and Gnashing (+3)
-   Fighting Real Dogs (+1)

**Bad At**

-   Remembering I Have A Rider (-2)
-   Not Shying Away From Flames And Loud Noises (-2)

**Hits**

-   \[1\]\[1\]\[1\]\[1\]

Up to three (3) Goblin Dogs will form a mob. Add four (4) hit boxes per
Goblin Dog. +1 attack and create advantage for each additional Goblin
Dog remaining.

These vicious creatures are mean and nasty, particularly when fighting
as a pack, but they are afraid of fire and loud noises.
:::

:::description
###### Elite Goblins

**Summoning Difficulty**

-   +8

**Aspects**

-   More Deadly Than You Think
-   Dogslicer!

**Good At**

-   Melee Combat (+3)
-   Raids (+1)

**Bad At**

-   Knowing When To Run (-2)

**Stress**:

-   \[1\]\[2\]\[3\]
-   Mild (2)
-   Moderate (4)

Do not treat as a mob.

These buggers put up a fight and die hard. When they are close to death,
roll 4dF and apply their Bad At Knowing When To Run Away modifier
against a difficulty of Average (+1). If they succeed they run away, if
they fail they fight to the death. Grrrr.
:::

:::description
###### Excited Goblins

**Summoning Difficulty**

-   +0

**Aspects**

-   Scatterbrained
-   Out Of Control

**Good At**

-   Undisciplined Attack (+2)

**Bad At**

-   Making Sense (-2)

Treat up to ten (10) Excited Goblins as a mob; add +1 hit box and +1 to
attack for every two Excited Goblins remaining
:::

:::description
###### Goblin Snake

**Summoning Difficulty**

-   +6

**Aspects**

-   Vicious But Lazy
-   Nauseating Breath

**Good At**

-   Slithering and Sneaking (+2)
-   Biting (+2)
-   Sickening Belch (+2)

**Bad At**

-   No Arms (-4)

**Stress**:

-   \[1\]\[2\]\[3\]
-   Mild (2)

Do not treat as a mob.
:::

:::description
###### Pyromaniac Goblins

**Summoning Difficulty**

-   +4

**Aspects**

-   Fire Fire!, Ha Ha Only Kidding\...RUN!!!!

**Good At**

-   Burning Brand (+2)
-   Lighting Things On Fire (+2)

**Bad At**

-   Being Brave (-2)
-   Avoiding Self-immolation (-2)

**Hits**

-   \[1\]\[1\]\[1\]

Up to three (3) Pyromaniac Goblins will form a mob. Add three (3) hit
boxes per goblin. +1 to attack and create advantage for every two (2)
Pyromaniac Goblins remaining
:::

:::description
###### Sneaky Goblins

**Summoning Difficulty**

-   +3

**Aspects**

-   Sneaky When They Want To Be, Surprise!

**Good At**

-   Stealth (+2)
-   Attacking From Surprise (+2)

**Bad At**

-   Stand Up Fights (-2)

**Hits**

-   \[1\]\[1\]

Up to five (5) Sneaky Goblins will form a mob. Add two (2) hit boxes per
goblin. +1 to attack and create advantage for every two (2) goblins
remaining

A pack of these attacking together from hiding can be nasty, otherwise
they tend to flee at the first sign of trouble.
:::

:::description
###### Goblin Snipers

**Summoning Difficulty**

-   +1

**Aspects**

-   Trusted Lieutenants
-   Compound Short Bows

**Good At**

-   Shooting Bows (+3)
-   Being Patient (+1)

**Bad At**

-   Melee (-2)
-   Shooting On The Move (-2)

**Hits**

-   \[1\]\[1\]

Up to five (5) Goblin Snipers will form a mob. Add two (2) hit boxes per
goblin. +1 to attack and create advantage for every two (2) goblins
remaining
:::

:::description
###### Sewer Goblins

**Summoning Difficulty**

-   +1

**Aspects**

-   Filth Covered Blighters
-   Vicious

**Good At**

-   Throwing Poo (+3)
-   Functioning In Sewers (+1)

**Bad At**

-   Avoiding Being Smelled (-2)
-   Bright Light! (-2)

**Hits**

-   \[1\]\[1\]

Up to five (5) Sewer Goblins will form a mob. Add two (2) hit boxes per
goblin. +1 to attack and create advantage for every two (2) goblins
remaining
:::

:::description
###### Sweet-toothed Goblins

**Summoning Difficulty**

-   +2

**Aspects**

-   Sugar Fiends!, Extra Quick

**Good At**

-   Evading Capture (+2)
-   Scampering (+2)

**Bad At**

-   Being Quiet (-2)
-   Avoiding The Lure Of Sweets! (-2)

**Hits**

-   \[1\]\[1\]\[1\]

Up to three (3) Sweet-toothed Goblins will form a mob. Add three (3) hit
boxes per goblin. +1 to overcome and defend for every two (2)
Sweet-toothed Goblins remaining

Sweet-toothed Goblins are sugar fiends! They aren\'t really very tough
but they are hard to come to grips with\...they keep slipping loose like
a greased pig in pursuit of more tasty sweets!
:::

## Lycanthropes

Lycanthropes are humanoids with the ability to turn into animals and
animal-humanoid hybrid shapes. Natural lycanthropes are born with this
ability and have perfect control over their shapechanging. Afflicted
lycanthropes contract this ability like a curse or disease from another
lycanthrope; they sometimes change form involuntarily.

:::description
###### Wererat

**Summoning Difficulty**

-   +6

**Aspects**

-   Lycanthropic Shapechanger
-   Rat Instincts

**Good At**

-   Sneaky (+3)
-   Vicious (+3)

**Bad At**

-   Social Interaction (-3)
-   Being Brave (-1)

**Stress**:

-   \[1\]\[2\]\[3\]
-   Mild (2)

Do not treat as a mob.
:::

## Oozes

An ooze is an amorphous or mutable creature, usually mindless. Often
found in dank, damp, underground places, they can be difficult to detect
and very dangerous to encounter. Many but not all oozes are acidic,
corrosive, or otherwise toxic. Some oozes are completely inert while
others are mobile.

:::description
###### Brown Mold

**Summoning Difficulty**

-   +5

**Aspects**

-   A Shapeless Mass Of Living Liquid Protoplasm
-   Brown
-   Feeds On Heat
-   Rapid Growth

**Good At**

-   Seeing Without Sight (+2)
-   Heat-draining Cold (+2)
-   Resisting Physical Attacks (+4)

**Bad At**

-   Sentience (-4)
-   Being Solid (-2)
-   Resisting Cold (-4),

**Hits**

-   \[1\]

**Stunts**

-   **Rapid Growth When Heated**: When stress from heat or fire attacks
    is inflicted on me, rather than take stress I instead add new hit
    boxes and grow to occupy an additional five foot square for each
    added hit box.

This pernicious mold occupies an area of roughly five square feet for
each hit box it has.

Treat as a mob, adding together the hit boxes of all the individual
molds that join together. +1 to attack with Heat-draining Cold for every
two (2) hit boxes.
:::

:::description
###### Giant Amoeba

**Summoning Difficulty**

-   +2

**Aspects**

-   A Shapeless Mass Of Living Liquid Protoplasm

**Good At**

-   Seeing Without Sight (+2)
-   Enveloping Prey (+2)
-   Resisting Physical Attacks (+2)

**Bad At**

-   Sentience (-4)
-   Being Solid (-2)

**Hits**

-   \[1\]\[1\]\[1\]

Do not treat as a mob.
:::

:::description
###### Green Slime

**Summoning Difficulty**

-   +0

**Aspects**

-   A Shapeless Mass Of Living Liquid Protoplasm
-   Bright Green

**Good At**

-   Seeing Without Sight (+2)
-   Caustic Slime (+4)
-   Resisting Physical Attacks (+4)
-   Can Dissolve Wood and Metal

**Bad At**

-   Sentience (-4)
-   Being Solid (-2)
-   Resisting Fire Cold or Sunlight (-4)
-   Resisting Cure Disease (-4)
-   Cannot Disolve Stone

**Hits**

-   \[1\]

This pernicious mold occupies an area of roughly five square feet for
each hit box it has.

Treat as a mob, adding together the hit boxes of all the individual
molds that join together. +1 to attack with Caustic Slime for every five
(5) hit boxes. :
:::

:::description
###### Grey Ooze

**Summoning Difficulty**

-   +7

**Aspects**

-   A Shapeless Mass Of Living Liquid Protoplasm

**Good At**

-   Seeing Without Sight (+2)
-   Acidic Slime (+4)
-   Resisting Physical Attacks (+2)
-   Immune to Fire and Cold
-   Can Dissolve Metal

**Bad At**

-   Sentience (-4)
-   Being Solid (-2)
-   Cannot Disolve Stone

**Stress**:

-   \[1\]\[2\]\[3\]
-   Mild (2)

Do not treat as a mob.
:::

## Outsiders

An Outsider is at least partially composed of the essence (but not
necessarily the material) of some plane other than the Material Plane.
Some creatures start out as some other type and become Outsiders when
they attain a higher (or lower) state of spiritual existence. Unlike
most other living creatures, an Outsider does not have a soul separate
from its body.

:::description
###### Abyssal Larva

**Summoning Difficulty**

-   +13

**Aspects**

-   Large Maggoty Mess
-   Chaotic Spawn
-   Outsider

**Good At**

-   Throwing My Disgusting Bulk Around: (+4)

**Bad At**

-   Sentience (-4)

**Stress**:

-   \[1\]\[2\]\[3\]
-   Mild (2)

**Stunts**

-   **Darkvision**: Because I have Darkvision I can see perfectly in
    total darkness.
-   **Sharp Senses**: Because I have sharp senses that alert me to
    nearby threats, I gain +2 to notice anything moving in my zone or an
    adjacent zone.
-   **Demonic Durability**: Because my demonic nature makes me much more
    durable than normal, I reduce by two (2) all stress inflicted on me
    by physical attacks. However this does not work against magic, cold
    iron, or weapons blessed by a benign deity.
-   **Demonic Immunity (-3)**: Because of my demonic nature, I am immune
    to electricity, fire, disease, and poison. However, positive energy
    inflicts 2 extra shifts of stress against me.
-   **Immune To Mind-Affecting**: Because I am immune to mind-affecting
    abilities, I am unaffected by any malign effect that relies on
    mental coersion or disorientation.
-   **Maggot Spray**: Once per session, I may spew maggots at a single
    target in my zone. I gain +4 to create advantage and if successful I
    attach the situational Aspect **Sickened** on the target; the
    difficulty to overcome this Aspect if it is applied is Fantastic
    (+6).

Do not treat as a mob.
:::

:::description
###### Babau Demon

**Summoning Difficulty**

-   +17

**Aspects**

-   Murderously Lethal
-   Outsider

**Good At**

-   Cruel Murder (+6)
-   Jumping (+3)
-   Stealth (+3)

**Bad At**

-   Resisting Divine (-2)
-   Self-Restraint (-2)

**Stress**:

-   \[1\]\[2\]\[3\]
-   Mild (2)
-   Moderate (4)
-   Severe (6)

The babau is an assassin, a murderer, and a sadist\-\--certainly not
traits unusual in the demons, yet the babau\'s penchant for stealth and
surprise sets it apart from its generally less-subtle kin. With no need
to eat (although most babaus relish the flavor of mortal meat on their
thin, raspy tongues), a babau can wait in ambush for years or
decades\-\--their inhuman patience in anticipating a well-conceived
murder also setting them apart from the other denizens of the Abyss.

Babaus obsess over the act of killing and take great pride in their
grisly art, often leaving behind some form of grim marker or obscure
signature, whether it be a distinctive modus operandi, an unnerving
token, or other profane evidence.

A babau typically carries a longspear or other weapon with which it can
strike at foes beyond its normal reach, but given the opportunity, a
babau prefers to fight with its teeth or claws. The foul, caustic sludge
that constantly seeps from their flesh prevents them from wearing armor
unless it is specially treated or resistant to acid.

A babau is 6 feet tall but weighs only 140 pounds. They form from mortal
souls of lone killers\-\--those who, in life, took pleasure in more
personal and intimate murders. Loosed upon the Material Plane, a babau
often finds itself in the same role, haunting the shadowy corners of the
world as remorseless assassins.
:::

:::description
###### Cacodaemon

**Summoning Difficulty**

-   +8

**Aspects**

-   Floating Orb Of Teeth
-   Outsider

**Good At**

-   Chomping (+2)
-   Making Soul Gems (+2)

**Bad At**

-   Rational Behavior (-2)

**Hits**

-   \[1\]\[1\]\[1\]\[1\]

Treat each Cacodaemon as a seperate mook, not as a mob.

**Stunts**

-   **Detect Good**: Because I am sensitive to ethical and moral
    propensities, I am able to sense strong concentrations of virtue and
    goodness in individuals, objects, and areas from six (6) zones away
    even if the source in not detectable to my other senses.
    Additionally, I gain +2 to notice relevant concentrations of
    goodness while Focused.
-   **Demonic Durability**: Because my demonic nature makes me much more
    durable than normal, I reduce by two (2) all stress inflicted on me
    by physical attacks. However this does not work against magic, cold
    iron, or weapons blessed by a benign deity.
-   **Demonic Immunity (-3)**: Because of my demonic nature, I am immune
    to electricity, fire, disease, and poison. However, positive energy
    inflicts 2 extra shifts of stress against me.
-   **Diseased Bite**: Because I can infect those I bite with a disease,
    if I bite someone and inflict a Moderate consequence, I can force it
    to be called **Got The Shakes!** or **Filth Fever!**. If I instead
    inflict a Severe consequence, I can force it to be called **Red
    Ache!** or **Leprosy!**. The same person can only be affected by
    this ability once per scene.
:::

:::description
###### Fuath Gremlin

**Summoning Difficulty**

-   +7

**Aspects**

-   Drown It!
-   Outsider
-   Aquatic

**Good At**

-   Wreaking Havok (+2)
-   Evading Attacks (+2)
-   Minor Magical Tricks (+2)

**Hits**

-   \[1\]\[1\]\[1\]\[1\]

**Stunts**

-   **Congeal Water (-2)**: Because I have a special magical ability,
    once per session I gain +4 to create advantage to attach the spell
    Aspect **Trapped In A Bubble Of Congealed Water** on an opponent in
    my zone or an adjacent zone. If I succeed, the target cannot breath
    and will begin to drown, taking one (1) stress at the beginning of
    each of their turns. The spell Aspect can be removed by overcoming a
    Fantastic (+6) difficulty; the difficulty is reduced by (-1) while
    being Forcefully Focused.
-   **Vulnerability To Sunlight (+1)**: \[Because I am vulnerable to
    bright light, I suffer -1 to all 4dF resolutions while exposed to
    sunlight or other intense light. If exposed to sunlight for more
    than an hour, my \[1\] stress box is considered to be checked at all
    times; I recover from this after being in darkness for at least an
    hour.
-   **Vulnerable To Heat and Flames (+1)**: Because I am vulnerable to
    heat and flames, I suffer one (1) additional stress from all heat or
    fire based attacks.
-   **Physically Weak (+2)**: Because I am physically very weak, I
    suffer -4 to all 4dF resolutions that involve lifting or moving
    physical objects or applying physical force.

Treat each Gremlin as a seperate mook, not as a mob.

Drowners of sailors and sinkers of ships, a fuath (FOO-ah) is a wicked
gremlin found in the sea. It climbs aboard ships in the dead of night to
sever ropes, bore holes in barrels, soil provisions, and murder any
hapless crew it puts to sleep or catches alone. It delights in drowning
creatures by surrounding them with magically thickened water, cackling
with wicked glee as its victims claw desperately for the air only inches
from their mouths.
:::

:::description
###### Hellhound

**Summoning Difficulty**

-   +15

**Aspects**

-   Swift And Cunning Hunter
-   Always Alert
-   Flaming Fury
-   Outsider

**Good At**

-   Burning Things (+3)
-   Noticing Things (+1)
-   Tooth And Claw (+2)

**Bad At**

-   Resisting Cold (-4)

**Stress**:

-   \[1\]\[2\]\[3\]
-   Mild (2)

Do not treat as a mob. Hellhounds fight together as a pack, but using
individual tactics to herd, flank, and outmaneuver prey.

**Stunts**

-   **Darkvision**: Because I have Darkvision I can see perfectly in
    total darkness.
-   **Relentless Tracker**: Because I am so good at tracking my prey, I
    get +2 when I create advantage or overcome challenges related to
    tracking things down in wilderness settings.
-   **Diabolic Durability**: Because my infernal nature makes me much
    more durable than normal, I reduce by two (2) all stress inflicted
    on me by physical attacks. However this does not work against magic,
    cold iron, or weapons blessed by a benign deity.
-   **Diabolic Immunity (-3)**: Because of my infernal nature, I am
    immune to electricity, fire, disease, and poison. However, positive
    energy inflicts two (2) extra shifts of stress against me.
-   **Breath Of Infernal Flame (-2)**: Because of my infernal nature
    twice per conflict I may breathe a cone of fire, gaining +2 to
    attack one or more targets in my zone and one adjacent zone. If I
    split my shifts between multiple targets each target suffers a -2
    penalty to defend against this attack.
:::

:::description
###### Lemure

**Summoning Difficulty**

-   +3

**Aspects**

-   Mindless Drone
-   The Least of Devils
-   Outsider

**Good At**

-   Clumsily Attacking (+2)
-   Being Disgusting (+2)

**Bad At**

-   Independent Thought (-8)

**Hits**

-   \[1\]\[1\]\[1\]

**Stunts**

-   **Darkvision**: Because I have Darkvision I can see perfectly in
    total darkness.
-   **Diabolic Durability**: Because my infernal nature makes me much
    more durable than normal, I reduce by two (2) all stress inflicted
    on me by physical attacks. However this does not work against magic,
    cold iron, or weapons blessed by a benign deity.
-   **Diabolic Immunity (-3)**: Because of my infernal nature, I am
    immune to electricity, fire, disease, and poison. However, positive
    energy inflicts two (2) extra shifts of stress against me.

Lemures are not very powerful, but they can take a hit. Treat Lemures as
a mob, adding +3 stress per additional Lemure.
:::

:::description
###### Nupperibo

**Summoning Difficulty**

-   +3

**Aspects**

-   Mindless Drone
-   The Least of Devils, Outsider

**Good At**

-   Poking Things With A Spear (+2)
-   Being Disgusting (+2)

**Bad At**

-   Independent Thought (-8)

**Hits**

-   \[1\]\[1\]\[1\]

**Stunts**

-   **Darkvision**: Because I have Darkvision I can see perfectly in
    total darkness.
-   **Diabolic Durability**: Because my infernal nature makes me much
    more durable than normal, I reduce by two (2) all stress inflicted
    on me by physical attacks. However this does not work against magic,
    cold iron, or weapons blessed by a benign deity.
-   **Diabolic Immunity (-3)**: Because of my infernal nature, I am
    immune to electricity, fire, disease, and poison. However, positive
    energy inflicts two (2) extra shifts of stress against me.

Nupperibos are not very powerful, but they can take a hit. Treat
Nupperibos as a mob, adding +3 stress per additional Nupperibo.
:::

:::description
###### Pugwampi

**Summoning Difficulty**

-   +2

**Aspects**

-   Wreck It!
-   Dervish of Destruction, Outsider

**Good At**

-   Wreaking Havok (+4)
-   Evading Attacks (+2)

**Bad At**

-   Being Calm (-2)
-   Rational Behavior (-2)
-   Defending Against Holy (-2)

**Hits**

-   \[1\]\[1\]

Treat each Pugwampi as a seperate mook, not as a mob.
:::

:::description
###### Shadow Mastiff

**Summoning Difficulty**

-   +16

**Aspects**

-   Swift And Cunning Hunter
-   What Lurks In Yonder Shadow
-   Outsider

**Good At**

-   Lurking (+2)
-   Noticing Things (+2)
-   Tooth And Claw (+4)

**Bad At**

-   In Bright Light (-2)

**Stress**:

-   \[1\]\[2\]\[3\]
-   Mild (2)

**Stunts**

-   **Darkvision**: Because I have Darkvision I can see perfectly in
    total darkness.
-   **Relentless Tracker**: Because I am so good at tracking my prey, I
    get +2 when I create advantage or overcome challenges related to
    tracking things down in wilderness settings.
-   **Lurker In Shadows (-2)**: Because I am really good at lurking in
    shadows, either due to skill or a magical ability, I gain +1 to all
    of my actions while I am cloaked in a reasonable amount of shadow or
    darkness.
-   **Terrifying Sound**: Because I am able to make a terrifying sound,
    I gain +1 when attempting to frighten or demoralize while doing so.
    Alternately, once per scene if I move a zone and attack I may also
    attempt to create advantage to frighten or demoralize everyone in
    the same zone as my target as a free action by making my scary sound
    simultaneously with my attack.

Do not treat as a mob. Shadow Mastiffs fight together as a pack, but
using individual tactics to herd, flank, and outmaneuver prey.

Although shaped like a dog, this muscular creature has a coat that
drinks up the light, drawing shadows in around it. Its maw is full of
sharp teeth, and a wisp of shadow drips from its writhing tongue.
:::

## People

Not all antagonists are creatures, monsters, outsiders, brutal
humanoids, or elementals.

### Bandits

People who have taken to robbery and predatory crime rather than seeking
an \"honest\" living.

:::description
###### Black Kiss Boy

**Summoning Difficulty**

-   +4

**Aspects**

-   Pesh and Night Lotus Addict
-   Hungry For Street Cred

**Good At**

-   Being Thuggish (+2)
-   Being Brash (+2)

**Bad At**

-   Being Legit (-2)
-   Being Brave (-2)

**Stress**:

-   \[1\]\[2\]\[3\]
-   Mild (2)

A gang of drug addicted \'cousins\' eager to impress bigger criminals
and become part of a bigger operation. They fight as individuals.
:::

:::description
###### Bandits (Deepwoods Crew)

**Summoning Difficulty**

-   +4

**Aspects**

-   Worse Than The Damn Goblins
-   Irredeemable

**Good At**

-   Guerrilla Tactics (+2)
-   Hiding in the Deepwoods (+2)
-   Ambushing Caravans (+2)

**Bad At**

-   Prolonged Engagements (-2)
-   Toe-to-toe Fighting (-1)

**Hits**

-   \[1\]

Up to five (5) bandits will fight as a mob, adding one (1) hit box per
bandit. +1 when attacking and defending for every three (3) bandits
remaining in the mob.
:::

:::description
###### Bandit

**Summoning Difficulty**

-   +3

**Aspects**

-   Merciless Scum
-   An Unsympathetic Lot

**Good At**

-   Banditry (+2)
-   Fighting (+2)

**Bad At**

-   Fighting When Outnumbered (-2)

**Hits**

-   \[1\]\[1\]

A Bandit fights as an individual but as part of a gang of at least two.
:::

### Cultists

:::description
###### Cultists of Norgorber

**Summoning Difficulty**

-   +6

**Aspects**

-   Hidden In Plain Sight
-   Murder Cult Members

**Good At**

-   Sneak Attack (+2)
-   Going Unnoticed (+2)
-   Black Murder (+2)

**Bad At**

-   Open Dealings (-2)
-   Empathy and Compassion (-2)

**Stress**:

-   \[1\]\[2\]\[3\]
-   Mild (2)

Do not treat as a mob.

Norgorber (pronounced NOR-gore-ber) is known as a deity of thievery and
assassination, as well as a keeper of secrets. He is called the \'Reaper
of the Reputation\' by some, but he has more insidious titles among his
other worshipers. He remains an enigma to most, and his true motives are
unknown. Many of his own followers remain ignorant of his plans and
designs. Norgorber is the only evil aligned god amongst the Ascended.

Norgorber\'s worshipers come from all walks of life and all of them are
termed Sons and Daughters of the Mask; many are clerics, rogues, bards
and assassins. Most followers of Norgorber will choose one of his Four
Aspects to particularly worship.

The most extreme are numbered among the murderous insane, who commit
atrocities in his reverence. The followers of the cult of **Father
Skinsaw** are known as the Skinsaw Men or the Skinsaw Cult. Spies and
politically minded folk who worship him as the **Reaper of Reputation**
consider him the deity of secret knowledge, such as the Ustalavic
organization called the Anaphexia. Thieves revere the **Gray Master**.
Assassins, alchemists and herbalists follow **Blackfingers**.

Norgorber\'s ceremonial colours are black and brown. The cultist\'s
clothes usually follow modern fashions, in order to blend in wherever
they are.

**Sacrificer of Norgorber**

Norgorber is a sinister but complex diety. Among the four sects
dedicated to him, the fourth attracts the most extreme and murderously
insane, who commit atrocities as acts of worship to \'Father Skinsaw\'.
The followers of this cult are known as the Skinsaw Men. The Skinsaw
cult is a centuries-old organization originating in Vyre, Cheliax and
their methods tend to involve kidnapping sacrificial victims as well as
random murders of opportunity.

**Socialite of Norgorber**

Norgorber is a sinister but complex diety. Known as the \'Reaper of
Reputation\' (among other less circumspect terms), some of his
worshipers are spies and power hungry politicos and social climbers who
consider Norgorber the deity of secret knowledge and ascension to
prominence and influence via a more left handed path. Such followers
blend in among society, pursuing the collection of secrets, leverage,
and other means to exert influence for their own aggrandizement. Their
weapons are blackmail, slander, lies, and when it comes to it poison.
:::

### Guards

City watch, house troops, hired guards, private security\...not always
uniformed but organized.

:::description
###### The Watch

**Summoning Difficulty**

-   +3

**Aspects**

-   Serving And Protecting
-   Local Cops

**Good At**

-   Fighting (+2)
-   Noticing (+2)

**Bad At**

-   Risking Their Lives Over Petty Crime (-2)

**Hits**

-   \[1\]\[1\]

Up to five (5) watchmen will form a mob, adding two (2) hit boxes per
individual. +1 when attacking and defending for each remaining watchman.
:::

### Militants

Militant is usually used to describe a person engaged in aggressive
verbal or physical combat (e.g. a soldier, an activist, revolutionary,
terrorist or insurgent).

:::description
###### Grey Maiden

**Summoning Difficulty**

-   +8

**Aspects**

-   Heavily Armored Bulwark, Member Of An Infamous Fallen Order

**Good At**

-   Sword & Board (+4)

**Bad At**

-   Letting Go Of The Past (-2)

**Stress**:

-   \[1\]\[2\]\[3\]
-   Mild (2)
-   Moderate (4)

Do not treat as a mob.

The Gray Maidens were the all-female, elite bodyguard for Queen Ileosa
Arabasti of Korvosa. Since the queen\'s death the group has been
officially disbanded; however, some cells remain active in Varisia
(outside of Korvosa) and Cheliax.

**Grey Maiden Champion**

The Gray Maidens were the all-female, elite bodyguard for Queen Ileosa
Arabasti of Korvosa. Since the queen\'s death the group has been
officially disbanded; however, some cells remain active in Varisia
(outside of Korvosa) and Cheliax
:::

### Sczarni

The Sczarni are a loose collection of Varisian crime families, operating
primarily in the cities and towns of Varisia, but found wherever
significant numbers of Varisians gather.

Sczarni focus is on the less violent crimes such as robbery,
pickpocketing, and confidence schemes, and generally target only
non-Varisians. They believe that this affords them the maximum profit
with minimum risk.

They may be driven out of town, beaten, jailed, or even mutilated, but
rarely is a Sczarni put to death for his or her crimes. Their activities
are notorious enough, however, that they have greatly contributed to the
racial stereotype of Varisians as untrustworthy thieves. Being
independently minded in the extreme, one Sczarni family will have next
to nothing in common with another, other than their occupation, cultural
background, and general methods.

Most Varisians are opposed to the Sczarni and want nothing to do with
them. They believe that their activities invite trouble and further
stereotyping against their kind. Despite this opinion, most Varisians
will offer aid to a Sczarni who is in trouble, especially when outsiders
are involved.

:::description
###### Sczarni Criminal

**Summoning Difficulty**

-   +6

**Aspects**

-   Dirty Deeds Done For A Reasonable Negotiated Rate
-   Hardened Criminals

**Good At**

-   Combatives (+2)
-   Roguish (+3), Sneaky (+1)

**Bad At**

-   Polite Society (-2)
-   Being Legit (-2)
-   Resisting A Sweet Deal (-2)

**Stress**:

-   \[1\]\[2\]\[3\]
-   Mild (2)
-   Moderate (4)

Do not treat as a mob.

Big shots and named men among the Sczarni, and far more dangerous than
oily street punks. Professional criminals, muscle-for-hire, underbosses,
racketeers\...they run the gamut. These are the kind of men and women
who make people fear the term Sczarni.
:::

:::description
###### Sczarni Heavy

**Summoning Difficulty**

-   +4

**Aspects**

-   Street Enforcer
-   Tough And Mean

**Good At**

-   Blunt Force Trauma (+3)
-   Shrugging It Off (+3)

**Bad At**

-   Blending In (-2)
-   Strategy (-2)
-   Being Nimble (-2)

**Stress**:

-   \[1\]\[2\]\[3\]
-   Mild (2)

Do not treat as a mob.

Run of the mill Sczarni Thugs are sometimes accompanied by one or two
big hulking bruisers.
:::

:::description
###### Sczarni Shooter

**Summoning Difficulty**

-   +4

**Aspects**

-   Street Enforcer
-   Aloof and Sinister

**Good At**

-   Crossbow or Shortbow (+3)
-   Daggerwork (+1)

**Bad At**

-   Toe to Toe Fights (-2), Seeming Legit and Normal (-2)

**Stress**:

-   \[1\]\[2\]\[3\]
-   Mild (2)

Do not treat as a mob.

Run of the mill Sczarni Thugs are sometimes accompanied by one or two
sinister beady-eyed marksmen.
:::

:::description
###### Sczarni Thugs

**Summoning Difficulty**

-   +0

**Aspects**

-   Oily Street Punks
-   Wise Guys

**Good At**

-   Shakedowns And Protection Rackets (+3)
-   Street Savvy (+2)

**Bad At**

-   One On One (-2)
-   Being On The Other Side Of The Tracks (-2)
-   Long-Term Planning (-2)

**Hits**

-   \[1\]\[1\]

Up to five (5) will fight as a mob, adding two (2) hit boxes per thug.
+1 when attacking and defending for every three (3) thugs remaining in
the mob.
:::

:::description
###### Tower Girls

**Summoning Difficulty**

-   +4

**Aspects**

-   The Crow Is Ours!
-   Recovering From Defeat By The Wringers

**Good At**

-   Second Story Work (+2)
-   Roguish (+2)

**Bad At**

-   One On One (-3)
-   Cooperating with Each Other (-1)

**Stress**:

-   \[1\]\[2\]\[3\]
-   Mild (2)

Do not treat as a mob.

Tend to operate in packs of two (2), but they fight as individuals.
:::

:::description
###### Underbridge Scum

**Summoning Difficulty**

-   +0

**Aspects**

-   Dirty Impoverished Scumbag
-   Ignorant And Bent On Survival

**Good At**

-   Dirty Fighting (+3)
-   Underbridge (+2)

**Bad At**

-   Where To Start? Almost Everything Else (-2)

**Hits**

-   \[1\]\[1\]

Up to five (5) will fight as a mob, adding two (2) hit boxes per Scum.
+1 when attacking and defending for every three (3) Scum remaining in
the mob.

Scum will generally break and run (concede), but only after at least one
or two of them have been killed.
:::

:::description
###### Varisian Menfolk

**Summoning Difficulty**

-   +0

**Aspects**

-   We Protect Our Own
-   Resentful Exploited Minority

**Good At**

-   Passive Intimidation (+2)
-   Brawling (+3)

**Bad At**

-   One On One (-2)
-   Being On The Other Side Of The Tracks (-2)
-   Long-Term Planning (-2)

**Hits**

-   \[1\]\[1\]

Up to five (5) will fight as a mob, adding two (2) hit boxes per
Varisian. +1 when attacking and defending for every three (3) Varisian
remaining in the mob.
:::

## Plants

It\'s a dangerous world, and even plants aren\'t always harmless. A
cautious adventurer should be wary of animated trees, carnivorous
bushes, and a wide variety of dangerous fungi.

:::description
###### Violet Fungus

**Summoning Difficulty**

-   +2

**Aspects**

-   A Man-sized Tentacled Purple Mushroom

**Good At**

-   Seeing Without Sight (+1)

**Bad At**

-   Sentience (-4)
-   Attacking Opponents Wearing Significant Amounts Of Inorganic
    Protection (-1 \[a shield\] to -6 \[full plate mail with visored
    helm\])

**Hits**

-   \[1\]\[1\]\[1\]

**Stunts**

-   **Plant Traits**: Because of my verdant nature, I am immune to mind-
    affecting effects (charms, compulsions, morale effects, patterns,
    and phantasms), paralysis, poison, polymorph, sleep, and stun.
    However I take +1 shift of stress from attacks that rely on cold,
    fire, acid, or are described as being especially effective vs plant
    life.
-   **Necrotic Touch (-4)**: Because my tentacles have the ability to
    instantly whither and rot a living creature\'s flesh to the bone
    with a mere touch, I gain +8 to attack a target in my zone and
    consequences inflicted by me tend to involve massive permanent
    scarring, whithered limbs, and similar major physical maiming.
-   **Slow Movement (+3)**: Because I am only able to travel very
    slowly, it takes me three exchanges to move one zone and I may not
    move and attack in the same exchange.

Up to five (5) Violet Fungi will form a mob. Add three (3) hit boxes and
+1 to attack with Necrotic Touch for each additional Violet Fungus.

A violet fungus feeds on the rot and decay of organic matter, but unlike
most fungi, they are not passive consumers of corruption. A violet
fungi\'s tendrils can strike with unexpected swiftness, and are coated
with a virulent venom that causes flesh to rot and decay with nauseating
speed.

This potent poison, if left untreated, can cause the flesh of an entire
arm or leg to drop away in no time at all, leaving behind only warm
bones that soon rot into corruption as well.

The violet fungus is one of the most notorious and feared dangers of the
world\'s caves. A traveler can often see signs of the violet fungus in
those who dwell or hunt in places where these carnivorous fungi lurk. In
these folk, deep and hideous scars mar bodies where entire furrows of
flesh seem scooped away\-\--the marks of a close encounter with a violet
fungus. Although violet fungi are mobile, they only move to attack or to
hunt for prey.

A violet fungus that has a steady supply of rot to sup upon is generally
content to remain in one place. Many underground-dwelling cultures take
advantage of this penchant, particularly troglodytes and vegepygmies,
and keep multiple violet fungi in key junctions and entrances to their
caverns as guardians, making sure to keep them well fed with carrion to
prevent them wandering farther into the den in search of food.
:::

## Undead

Undead are once-living creatures animated by spiritual or supernatural
forces. Most undead were once living. Knowing details about the phase of
existence that preceded a creature\'s undeath is often invaluable in
determining its motives.

Holy water damages undead as though it were acid. Distributed by goodly
religious orders the world over, holy water is the only line of defense
against undead for many commoners. Undead are also healed by negative
energy and harmed by positive energy. Undead are typically immune to
numerous magical effects, including mind-affecting effects and abilities
that affect a creature\'s physical constitution.

Undead are almost invariably evil or inimical to life, as are the means
to create such beings.

:::description
###### Fast Zombie

**Summoning Difficulty**

-   +1

**Aspects**

-   Putrescent Ambulatory Corpse
-   Feeling No Pain
-   BRAAAAINS!!!!

**Good At**

-   Being Scary And Gross (+2)
-   Melee (+2)
-   Being Quick Or Nimble (+2)
-   Resist Damage (+2)

**Bad At**

-   Resist Headshots And Burst Damage (-2)

**Hits**

-   \[1\]
:::

:::description
###### Ghast

**Summoning Difficulty**

-   +13

**Aspects**

-   Super-Ghoul
-   Corporeal Undead
-   Paralyzing Bite
-   Horrendous Stench Of The Unclean

**Good At**

-   Biting (+4)
-   Paralyzing (+4)
-   Stench (+2)

**Bad At**

-   Hiding (Due To Smell) (-4)

**Stress**:

-   \[1\]\[2\]\[3\]
-   Mild (2)
-   Moderate (4)

Do not treat as a mob.
:::

:::description
###### Ghoul

**Summoning Difficulty**

-   +5

**Aspects**

-   Corporeal Undead
-   Paralyzing Bite
-   Stench Of The Unclean

**Good At**

-   Biting (+3)
-   Paralyzing (+3)

**Bad At**

-   Organization (-2)
-   Elves Are Immune To My Paralysis

**Hits**

-   \[1\]\[1\]

Up to five (5) ghouls will fight as a mob; add two (2) hit boxes per
ghoul.

+1 attack and defense for every three (3) ghouls remaining in the mob.
:::

:::description
###### Lacedon

**Summoning Difficulty**

-   +7

**Aspects**

-   Amphibious Ghoul
-   Corporeal Undead
-   Paralyzing Bite

**Good At**

-   Biting (+2)
-   Paralyzing (+2)
-   Swimming (+2)
-   Fighting While In Water (+2)

**Bad At**

-   Being On Solid Land (-2)
-   Elves Are Immune To My Paralysis

**Hits**

-   \[1\]\[1\]

Up to five (5) lacedons will fight as a mob; add two (2) hit boxes per
lacedon.

+1 attack and defense for every three (3) lacedons remaining in the mob.
:::

:::description
###### Skeleton

**Summoning Difficulty**

-   +5

**Aspects**

-   Leg Bone Connected To The\...
-   Undead Animated Bonepile

**Good At**

-   Being Scary And Gross (+1)
-   Melee (+1)
-   Resisting Damage (+4)

**Bad At**

-   Resisting Smashing Damage (-2)

**Hits**

-   \[1\]

Up to ten (10) skeletons will fight as a mob; add one (1) hit boxes per
skeleton.

+1 attack for every three (3) skeletons remaining in the mob.
:::

:::description
###### Zombie

**Summoning Difficulty**

-   +5

**Aspects**

-   Putrescent Ambulatory Corpse
-   Feeling No Pain
-   BRAAAAINS!!!!

**Good At**

-   Being Scary And Gross (+2)
-   Melee (+2), Resist Damage (+4)

**Bad At**

-   Resist Headshots And Burst Damage (-2)
-   Being Quick Or Nimble (-2)

**Hits**

-   \[1\]

Up to ten (10) zombies will fight as a mob; add one (1) hit boxes per
zombie.

+1 attack for every three (3) zombies remaining in the mob.
:::

## Vermin

Big bugs aren\'t just gross and unpleasant, they can be quite lethal.

:::description
###### Albino Cave Solifugid

**Summoning Difficulty**

-   +11

**Aspects**

-   Many-legged Man-Sized Insect
-   Pincer Claws

**Good At**

-   Pincers & Bite (+4)
-   Unusual Senses (+2)
-   Sneaky (+2)

**Bad At**

-   Sentience (-2)
-   Resisting Blunt Force (-2)

**Stress**:

-   \[1\]\[2\]\[3\]
-   Mild (2)
-   Moderate (4)

**Stunts**

-   **Ambusher**: Because I am so good at ambushing my prey, if I am
    able to surprise an opponent I gain +4 to attack in the first
    exchange.

Do not treat as a mob.
:::

:::description
###### Cave Fisher

**Summoning Difficulty**

-   +8

**Aspects**

-   Frightening Appearance
-   Very Large
-   Many-legged

**Good At**

-   Adhesive Tongue (+4)
-   Mauling (+2)

**Bad At**

-   Sentience (-2)
-   Resisting Blunt Force (-2)

**Stress**:

-   \[1\]\[2\]\[3\]
-   Mild (2)

**Stunts**

-   **Cave Fishing**: Because I can shoot a very sticky adhesive line
    and reel it in, when I use Adhesive Tongue I am able to project a
    long stream of sticky goo from my mouth at a single target within my
    zone or in an adjacent zone. To do this I create advantage vs a
    Mediocre (+0) difficulty; the target may defend. If successful I
    attach a **On The Hook** effect to the target. I can only have one
    of these effects active at the same time.

Do not treat as a mob.
:::

:::description
###### On The Hook

**Aspects**

-   Very Strong And Sticky Thread
-   Reel Em In

**Good At**

-   Dragging Captured Target Back To Cave Fisher (+4)

**Hits**

-   \[1\]\[1\]\[1\]

Anchored to target.
:::

:::description
###### Centipede Swarm

**Summoning Difficulty**

-   +3

**Aspects**

-   Carnivorous and Hungry
-   Get Into Everything

**Good At**

-   Swarming (+4)
-   Resisting Physical Damage (+2)

**Bad At**

-   Sentience (-2)
-   Resisting Area Of Effect Attacks (-4)

**Hits**

-   \[1\]\[1\]\[1\]\[1\]\[1\]

Do not treat as a mob.
:::

:::description
###### Giant Black Widow

**Summoning Difficulty**

-   +7

**Aspects**

-   Frightening Appearance
-   Many-legged

**Good At**

-   Spin A Web (+3)
-   Poison Bite (+3)

**Bad At**

-   Sentience (-2)
-   Resisting Blunt Force (-2)

**Stress**:

-   \[1\]\[2\]\[3\]
-   Mild (2)

**Stunts**

-   **Web**: Because I can spin sticky entrapping webs, when I Spin A
    Web I am able to project a disgusting stream of sticky goo from my
    abdomen at targets within my zone or in an adjacent zone. To do this
    I create advantage vs a Mediocre (+0) difficulty; the target may
    defend. If successful I attach a **Trapped In A Web** effect to the
    target.

Do not treat as a mob.
:::

:::description
###### Trapped In A Web

**Aspects**

-   Disgusting Sticky Mess
-   High Tensile Strength

**Good At**

-   Holding Trapped Target Immobile (+4)

**Hits**

-   \[1\]\[1\]\[1\]

Anchored to target.
:::

:::description
###### Giant Spider

**Summoning Difficulty**

-   +1

**Aspects**

-   Many-legged

**Good At**

-   Poison Bite (+4)

**Bad At**

-   Sentience (-2)
-   Resisting Blunt Force (-2)

**Hits**

-   \[1\]\[1\]

Up to five (5) spiders will form a mob. Add one (1) hit box for each
spider. +1 attack and defend for every three (3) spiders remaining in
the mob.
:::

:::description
###### Giant Spinner Spider

**Summoning Difficulty**

-   +11

**Aspects**

-   Many-legged

**Good At**

-   Spin A Web (+2)
-   Poison Bite (+2)

**Bad At**

-   Sentience (-2)
-   Resisting Blunt Force (-2)

**Hits**

-   \[1\]\[1\]\[1\]\[1\]\[1\]\[1\]

**Stunts**

-   **Web**: Because I can spin sticky entrapping webs, when I Spin A
    Web I am able to project a disgusting stream of sticky goo from my
    abdomen at targets within my zone or in an adjacent zone. To do this
    I create advantage vs a Mediocre (+0) difficulty; the target may
    defend. If successful I attach a **Trapped In A Web** effect to the
    target.

Do not treat as a mob.
:::

:::description
###### Trapped In A Web

**Aspects**

-   Disgusting Sticky Mess
-   High Tensile Strength

**Good At**

-   Holding Trapped Target Immobile (+4)

**Hits**

-   \[1\]\[1\]\[1\]

Anchored to target.
:::

:::description
###### Giant Water Spider

**Summoning Difficulty**

-   +5

**Aspects**

-   Sort Of Amphibious
-   Many-legged

**Good At**

-   Spinning Webs (+2)
-   Poison Bite (+2)
-   Swimming (+2)

**Bad At**

-   Sentience (-2)
-   Resisting Blunt Force (-2)

**Hits**

-   \[1\]\[1\]\[1\]\[1\]\[1\]\[1\]

Do not treat as a mob.
:::

:::description
###### Giant Worker Ant

**Summoning Difficulty**

-   +1

**Aspects**

-   Strength Of An Ant!
-   Carapace

**Good At**

-   Ant Drudgery (+1)
-   Bite (+1)
-   Being Durable (+2)

**Bad At**

-   Sentience (-2)
-   Resisting Blunt Force (-2)

**Hits**

-   \[1\]

Up to ten (10) ants will form a mob. Add one (1) hit box for each ant.
+1 attack and defend for every three (3) ants remaining in the mob.
:::

:::description
###### Shriezyx

**Summoning Difficulty**

-   +15

**Aspects**

-   Many-legged
-   Aberration, Afraid Of Fire

**Good At**

-   Poison Bite (+5)
-   Exotic Senses (+3)
-   Resisting Damage (+3)

**Bad At**

-   Fire (-4)

**Stress**:

-   \[1\]\[2\]\[3\]
-   Mild (2)
-   Moderate (4)

**Stunts**

-   **Web**: Because I can spin sticky entrapping webs, when I Spin A
    Web I am able to project a disgusting stream of sticky goo from my
    abdomen at targets within my zone or in an adjacent zone. To do this
    I create advantage vs a Mediocre (+0) difficulty; the target may
    defend. If successful I attach a **Trapped In A Web** effect to the
    target.

Do not treat as a mob.

:::description
###### Trapped In A Web

**Aspects**

-   Disgusting Sticky Mess
-   High Tensile Strength

**Good At**

-   Holding Trapped Target Immobile (+4)

**Hits**

-   \[1\]\[1\]\[1\]

Anchored to target.
:::
:::


# Alchemical Items

## Alchemical

Alchemical items are useful, pragmatic, generally affordable, and
popular commodities amongst adventurers.

:::description
###### Acid Bomb

**Aspects**

-   Alchemical Weapon
-   Faintly Magical (Conjuration)

**Benefit**

-   +3 while Carefully Focused to attack a target that I can detect and
    have a line of sight to within two (2) zones with a grenade like
    item that bursts on contact to douse the target in acid. If I
    succeed with style, I must reduce the stress to get a boost but the
    boost is upgraded to the situational Aspect **Acid Burn!** which is
    attached to the target. This Aspect is automatically invoked at the
    beginning of subsequent exchanges to inflict two (2) stress to the
    target per invoke. It is a Fair (+2) difficulty to remove this
    Aspect.

**Uses**

-   \[1\]

Each usage box indicates a seperate use or application and each use
expends a usage box; when there are none left the item is expended.

The user must be able to throw the acid bomb at the target.
:::

:::description
###### Alchemist\'s Fire

**Aspects**

-   Alchemical Weapon
-   Faintly Magical (Evocation)

**Benefit**

-   +3 while Quickly Focused to attack a target that I can detect and
    have a line of sight to within two (2) zones with a grenade like
    item that bursts into flame on contact. If I succeed with style, I
    must reduce the stress to get a boost but the boost is upgraded to
    the situational Aspect **On Fire** with two (2) invokes, which is
    attached to the target. This Aspect is automatically invoked at the
    beginning of subsequent exchanges to inflict two (2) stress to the
    target per invoke. It is a Fair (+2) difficulty to remove this
    Aspect.

**Uses**

-   \[1\]

Each usage box indicates a seperate use or application and each use
expends a usage box; when there are none left the item is expended.

The user must be able to throw the alchemist\'s fire at the target.
:::

:::description
###### Dust of Appearance

**Aspects**

-   Alchemical Toolkit
-   Faintly Magical (Abjuration)

**Benefit**

-   +3 while Flashily Focused to overcome Invisibility Aspects (and
    similar effects) active in my zone or an adjacent zone. The dust
    immediately catalyzes with a faintly sparkly display, disrupting
    most invisibility related effects. The rolled result applies to all
    such Aspects active in the targeted zone, and any such Aspects that
    are overcome are removed from play.

**Uses**

-   \[1\]

Each usage box indicates a seperate use or application and each use
expends a usage box; when there are none left the item is expended.

The user must be able to manipulate the pouch of magical dust and fling
the dust into the air in their own zone or an adjacent zone.
:::

:::description
###### Dust of Dryness

**Aspects** - Alchemical Toolkit - Faintly Magical (Transmutation)

**Benefit**

-   +3 while Flashily Focused to overcome Water based Aspects (and
    similar effects) active in my zone or an adjacent zone. The dust
    immediately attempts to absorb all moisture in the area. The rolled
    result applies to all such Aspects active in the targeted zone, and
    any such Aspects that are overcome are removed from play.
    Alternately this may be used as an attack against Water elementals.

**Uses**

-   \[1\]

Each usage box indicates a seperate use or application and each use
expends a usage box; when there are none left the item is expended.

The user must be able to manipulate the pouch of magical dust and fling
the dust at their own zone or an adjacent zone.
:::

:::description
###### Everburning Torch

**Aspects**

-   Alchemical Tool
-   Faintly Magical (Evocation)

**Benefit**

-   An Everburning Torch has a command word that when uttered activates
    or deactivates it. While activated the Everburning Torch sheds
    enough light to brightly illuminate the zone it is currently in and
    all adjacent zones in each direction (unless obstructed). The
    difficulty to extinguish, turn off without the command word, or
    destroy an Everburning Torch is Fantastic (+6).

**Uses**

-   \[1\]

Each usage box indicates a seperate use or application and each use
expends a usage box; when there are none left the item is expended.

The user must be able to manipulate an Everburning Torch and speak its
command word to activate or deactivate it. However once activated an
Everburning Torch will continue to shine even if put down or handed off
to another person to hold or carry.
:::

:::description
###### Gas Bomb

**Aspects**

-   Alchemical Weapon
-   Faintly Magical (Conjuration)

**Benefit**

-   +3 while Carefully Focused to attack a target zone within two (2)
    zones of me with a grenade like item. If I am successful the gas
    bomb shatters, releasing toxic fumes and applying the situational
    Aspect **Toxic Gas!** to the zone with two free invokes. This Aspect
    is automatically invoked now and at the beginning of subsequent
    exchanges to inflict two (2) stress per invoke to every target
    within the affected zone that needs to breathe. This Aspect can be
    removed by strong winds or focused air by overcoming a Good (+3)
    difficulty.

**Uses**

-   \[1\]

Each usage box indicates a seperate use or application and each use
expends a usage box; when there are none left the item is expended.

The user must be able to throw the gas bomb at the target.
:::

:::description
###### Incense of Meditation

**Aspects**

-   Block of Incense
-   Faintly Magical (Divine)

**Benefit**

-   This small rectangular block of sweet smelling incense is visually
    indistinguishable from nonmagical incense until lit. If a divine
    spellcaster spends at least an hour meditating and praying while in
    the same zone as burning incense of meditation, the situational
    Aspect **Meditative Focus** is attached to them and lasts for a full
    day unless expended or removed. While affected by this situational
    Aspect, the divine caster gains +1 shift to all 4dF rolls they make
    while being Carefully Divine.

**Uses**

-   \[1\]

Each usage box indicates a seperate use or application and each use
expends a usage box; when there are none left the item is expended.
:::

:::description
###### Restorative Elixir

**Aspects**

-   Alchemical Concoction
-   Faintly Magical (Healing)

**Benefit**

+3 while Carefully Focused to overcome vs a Superb (+5) difficulty. If I
am successful I remove all debilitating situational Aspects currently
affecting my health or normal functioning that have a difficulty to
remove of Great (+4) or less. This does not work on environmental
Aspects, scene Aspects, or other situational Aspects that affect me
externally, it only works against situational Aspects that affect me
directly and personally such as poison, fatigue, some spells, curses,
and so forth. Additionally, if I am successful, I may also clear one of
my stress boxes or a Mild Consequence. To use this ability I must be
able to access the elixir and drink its contents.

**Uses**

-   \[1\]

Each usage box indicates a seperate use or application and each use
expends a usage box; when there are none left the item is expended.

The user must be able to manipulate the vial containing the vapor.
:::

:::description
###### Smokestick

**Aspects**

-   Alchemical Annoyance
-   Faintly Magical (Conjuration)

**Benefit**

-   +0 while Sneakily Roguish to create advantage against a Fair (+2)
    difficulty. Success allows me to add the situational Aspect **Thick
    Smoke** to any two adjacent zones within one (1) zone of my zone.
    Any form of stiff wind will disperse the smoke within an exchange or
    two, but in the meantime the smoke cloud provides Superb (+5) active
    opposition to seeing in or out of the affected area.

**Uses**

-   \[1\]

Each usage box indicates a seperate use or application and each use
expends a usage box; when there are none left the item is expended.

The user must be able to manipulate the smokestick to activate it; if
anchoring the smokestick on an adjacent zone the user must also be able
to toss the smokestick into the targeted zone.
:::

:::description
###### Sneeze Dust

**Aspects**

-   Alchemical Toolkit
-   Faintly Magical (Transmutation)

**Benefit**

-   +2 while Quickly Focused to use create advantage to attach the
    situational Aspect **Face Full Of Sneeze Dust** to a target in my
    same zone. The dust seeks moisture and thus lodges into the
    target\'s eyes, mouth, nose, and throat causing them to cough and
    sneeze uncontrollably. The difficulty to overcome the situational
    Aspect is Great (+4) unless the target\'s head is doused in water in
    which case the Aspect is removed automatically. Targets that do not
    breathe or have very unusual anatomy are not affected by this
    effect.

**Uses**

-   \[1\]

Each usage box indicates a seperate use or application and each use

The user must be able to manipulate the pouch of magical dust and fling
the dust directly into the face of a target that is in their own zone.
expends a usage box; when there are none left the item is expended.
:::

:::description
###### Tanglefoot Bag

**Aspects**

-   Alchemical Annoyance
-   Faintly Magical (Transmutation)

**Benefit**

+2 while Quickly Focused to create advantage on a target that I can
detect and have a line of sight to within two (2) zones. If I am
successful I attach the situational Aspect **Trapped By Tanglefoot
Goo!** to the target with three (3) invokes which roots them in their
current zone and can cause flying targets to plummet if they use winged
flight. This Aspect can be removed by overcoming a Good (+4) difficulty,
but each failed attempt to overcome it expends an invoke..

However when it is expended or removed a second situational Aspect,
**Tanglefoot Goo Residue!**, is attached to the target with four (4)
invokes. The second Aspect prevents the target from moving more than one
(1) zone per action, and they cannot both move and attack. The second
Aspect can be removed by overcoming a Superb (+6) difficulty, but each
failed attempt to overcome it expends an invoke.

**Uses**

-   \[1\]

Each usage box indicates a seperate use or application and each use
expends a usage box; when there are none left the item is expended.

The user must be able to throw the tanglefoot bag at the target.
:::

:::description
###### Trapbusting Kit

**Aspects**

-   Alchemical Toolkit
-   Faintly Magical (Transmutation)

**Benefit**

-   +3 while Carefully Roguish to overcome mechanical or magical traps
    that have a triggering mechanism. Each Trapbusting Kit contains
    enough raw materials to mix up an acid or a neutralizing agent or
    even a small shaped explosive sufficient to counter different kinds
    of traps.

**Uses**

-   \[1\]

Each usage box indicates a seperate use or application and each use
expends a usage box; when there are none left the item is expended.

The user must have Roguish +1 or better to use this item, and must be
able to use the materials in the trapbusting kit to mix up a compound to
suit the situation and be able to apply it directly to the triggering
mechanism of the trap.
:::

:::description
###### Vapor of Venting

**Aspects**

-   Alchemical Toolkit
-   Faintly Magical (Divination)

**Benefit**

-   +3 while Carefully Roguish to notice hidden doors (and similar
    difficulties) in my zone by releasing a magically condensed and
    slightly glowing vapor that seeks out even the tiniest of cracks and
    seams to seep and vent through thus revealing the edges of hidden
    doors and compartments.

**Uses**

-   \[1\]

Each usage box indicates a seperate use or application and each use
expends a usage box; when there are none left the item is expended.

The user must be able to manipulate the vial containing the vapor.
:::

## Amulets

Amulets often offer powerful magical abilities to their wearers.

:::description
**Amulet Of Clear Thought**: Because I have an Amulet of Clear Thought,
I may add +1 when being Clever.
:::

:::description
**Amulet Of Fortification**: Because I have an Amulet of Fortification,
when opponents inflict a consequence on me they do not get a free invoke
on it.
:::

:::description
**Amulet Of Mighty Fists**: Because I have an Amulet of Mighty Fists, I
may add +1 while Focused to attack barehanded.
:::

:::description
**Amulet Of Natural Armor**: Because I have an Amulet of Natural Armor,
I may add +1 to defend against physical attacks.
:::

:::description
**Deathbalm Talisman**: Because I have a Deathbalm Talisman, I gain +1
to defend against effects that would poison, sicken, weaken, or drain
me. Additionally, once per session I can invoke the amulet to clear all
of my stress and my Mild Consequence, or to reduce a non-social Moderate
Consequence to a Mild Consequence; however if I do this the amulet
becomes dormant and unusable for a day.
:::

## Armor

Enchanted armor, highly valued for protective magics by those who face
physical danger.

:::description
**Armor Of Fortification (-2)**: Because I have a suit of Armor of
Fortification, while wearing it I gain +1 to defend against physical
attacks and when opponents inflict a damage-related consequence on me
they do not get a free invoke on it.
:::

:::description
**Bracers of Mitigation**: Because I wear mildly magical bracers that
protect me from harm, I gain +1 to defend against physical and magical
attacks while wearing them.
:::

:::description
**Magical Armor**: Because I wear mildly magical armor, I gain +1 to
defend against physical and magical attacks while wearing it.
:::

:::description
**Magical Armor Of Thorns**: Because I wear mildly magical armor bearing
various spikes and sharp edges I gain +1 when Combative to defend
against physical attackers using their bare hands or natural weapons,
and if I defend with style I may use the boost to inflict a single point
of stress on my attacker immediately as a free action. Additionally I
may justify using Combatives even when unarmed as I can use the armor\'s
spikes and edges as lethal weapons; attempts to disarm me of this
\'weapon\' must overcome an Astonishing (+9) challenge.
:::

:::description
**Runic Armor Of Resilience**: **Because I have a suit of Runic Armor Of
Resilience, while wearing it when opponents inflict a damage-related
consequence on me they do not get a free invoke on it and I gain a boost
called Armored Resilience**.
:::

## Potions

Potions are very common and popular magical items allowing people with
no magical ability whatsoever to benefit from frequently powerful and
useful magical abilities. Potions are a commodity, and also can be
vulnerable to breakage and theft. But this does little to detract from
their value due to their sheer practicality.

These alchemical items can take many forms ranging from oils, salves,
dusts, powders, and other such concoctions. However, liquid intended to
be injested is by far the most common form and thus \'potion\' is used
as a general term.

Potions are essentially magical spells trapped in a concoction of some
kind, but unlike Scrolls, Wands, and other similar items they can
generally be used by anyone and are thus of much broader utility.
Potions typically have a flat pre-set effect and thus offer a dependable
but inflexible benefit. The effects of Potions are also typically very
easy to dispel.

### Augmenting Potions

Potions that temporarily grant a character special, extra-normal
abilities..

:::description
###### Potion Of Disguise

**Aspects**

-   Potion In A Flask
-   Faintly Magical (Illusion)

**Benefit**

-   A character may drink the potion as an action to \'cast\' the spell
    Disguise on themselves. Treat this as if the create advantage
    attempt succeeded and the resulting spell Aspect has two (2)
    invokes.

**Uses**

-   \[1\]

Each usage box indicates a seperate use or application and each use
expends a usage box; when there are none left the item is expended.

:::description
###### Disguise

Arcane Spell (Illusion)

Create advantage while Sneakily Arcane vs an Average (+1) difficulty to
create a spell Aspect on myself called **Magical Disguise** for one (1)
scene or until all invocations are used. While it is active this Aspect
allows me to look like someone else. Attempts to imitate a specific
individual are more likely to be disbelieved unless a convincing
portrayal is given. I may invoke the Aspect to gain a bonus on an action
where looking like someone else helps me succeed, such as attacking an
unaware opponent. The spell Aspect can be temporarily neutralized by
those with unusual senses or magic or special items creating an
applicable advantage; the ability or item will generally specify how it
works or what the difficulty is. The spell Aspect can also be overcome
and thus removed by some abilities that explicitly counter illusions or
dispel magic in which case the difficulty is determined as normal per
the Simple Magic Guidelines.
:::
:::

:::description
###### Potion Of Flying

**Aspects**

-   Potion In A Flask
-   Faintly Magical (Transmutation)

**Benefit**

-   A character may drink the potion as an action to \'cast\' the spell
    Flying on themselves. Treat this as if the create advantage attempt
    succeeded and the resulting spell Aspect has two (2) invokes.

**Uses**

-   \[1\]

Each usage box indicates a seperate use or application and each use
expends a usage box; when there are none left the item is expended.

:::description
###### Flying

Arcane Spell (Transmutation), Buff

Create advantage while Arcane vs a Fair (+2) difficulty to create a
spell Aspect on myself called **At-Will Flight** for one (1) scene or
until all invocations are used. While this Aspect is active I can fly at
will. While flying I am unaffected by obstacles that I can reasonably
fly over, and I can hover out of easy reach of the ground thus
frustrating melee attackers. Additionally when moving one or more (1+)
zones I may move one (1) additional zone. I may invoke this Aspect to
move one (1) additional zone or to gain a +2 bonus to overcome obstacles
to my movement.
:::
:::

:::description
###### Potion Of Invisibility

**Aspects**

-   Potion In A Flask
-   Faintly Magical (Illusion)

**Benefit**

A character may drink the potion as an action to \'cast\' the spell
Invisibility on themselves. Treat this as if the create advantage
attempt succeeded and the resulting spell Aspect has two (2) invokes.

**Uses**

-   \[1\]

Each usage box indicates a seperate use or application and each use
expends a usage box; when there are none left the item is expended.

:::description
###### Invisibility

Arcane Spell (Illusion), Invisibility

Create advantage while Sneakily Arcane vs an Average (+1) difficulty to
create a spell Aspect on myself called **Invisible** for one (1) scene
or until all invocations are used. While the Aspect is in play, I cannot
be seen by normal senses. I may invoke the Aspect to gain a bonus on an
action where being invisible helps me succeed, such as attacking an
unaware opponent. The spell Aspect can be temporarily neutralized by
those with unusual senses or magic or special items creating an
applicable advantage; the ability or item will generally specify how it
works or what the difficulty is. The spell Aspect can also be overcome
and thus removed by some abilities that explicitly counter invisibility
or dispel magic in which case the difficulty is determined as normal per
the Simple Magic Guidelines.
:::
:::

### Buffing Potions

Potions that grant temporary bonuses..

:::description
###### Potion Of Barkskin

**Aspects**

-   Potion In A Flask
-   Faintly Magical (Primal Plant)

**Benefit**

-   A character may drink the potion as an action to \'cast\' the spell
    Barkskin on themselves. Treat this as if the create advantage
    attempt succeeded and the resulting spell Aspect has two (2)
    invokes.

**Uses**

-   \[1\]

Each usage box indicates a seperate use or application and each use
expends a usage box; when there are none left the item is expended.

:::description
###### Barkskin

Primal Spell (Plant)

Create advantage while Carefully Primal vs an Average (+1) difficulty to
apply the spell Aspect **Barkskin** to myself or an ally in my zone.
While this Aspect is active the recipient gains +2 when defending
against physical or damaging magical attacks. This Aspect may also be
invoked to offer additional protection when defending from physical or
magical harm.
:::
:::

:::description
###### Potion Of Charisma

**Aspects**

-   Potion In A Flask
-   Faintly Magical (Divine)

**Benefit**

-   A character may drink the potion as an action to \'cast\' the spell
    Divine Charimsa on themselves. Treat this as if the create advantage
    attempt succeeded and the resulting spell Aspect has two (2)
    invokes.

**Uses**

-   \[1\]

Each usage box indicates a seperate use or application and each use
expends a usage box; when there are none left the item is expended.

:::description
###### Divine Charisma

Divine Spell (Blessing), Buff

Create advantage while Carefully Divine vs an Average (+1) difficulty to
create a spell Aspect on myself called **Divine Charisma** for one (1)
scene or until all invocations are used. While this Aspect is active I
am more likeable and charming than I normally am. I may invoke this
Aspect to grant myself +1 Flashy for three (3) consecutive exchanges.
:::
:::

:::description
###### Potion Of Constitution

**Aspects**

-   Potion In A Flask
-   Faintly Magical (Divine)

**Benefit**

A character may drink the potion as an action to \'cast\' the spell
Divine Constitution on themselves. Treat this as if the create advantage
attempt succeeded and the resulting spell Aspect has two (2) invokes.

**Uses**

-   \[1\]

Each usage box indicates a seperate use or application and each use
expends a usage box; when there are none left the item is expended.

:::description
###### Divine Constitution

Divine Spell (Blessing), Buff

Create advantage while Carefully Divine vs an Average (+1) difficulty to
create a spell Aspect on myself called **Divine Constitution** for one
(1) scene or until all invocations are used. While this Aspect is active
I am more durable than I normally am. I may invoke this Aspect to absorb
two (2) shifts of damage.
:::
:::

:::description
###### Potion Of Dexterity

**Aspects**

-   Potion In A Flask
-   Faintly Magical (Transmutation)

**Benefit**

-   A character may drink the potion as an action to \'cast\' the spell
    Arcane Dexterity on themselves. Treat this as if the create
    advantage attempt succeeded and the resulting spell Aspect has
    two (2) invokes.

**Uses**

-   \[1\]

Each usage box indicates a seperate use or application and each use
expends a usage box; when there are none left the item is expended.

:::description
###### Arcane Speed

Arcane Spell (Transmutation), Buff

Create advantage while Carefully Arcane vs an Average (+1) difficulty to
create a spell Aspect on myself called **Arcane Speed** for one (1)
scene or until all invocations are used. While this Aspect is active I
am quicker than I normally am. I may invoke this Aspect to grant myself
+1 Quick for three (3) consecutive exchanges.
:::
:::

:::description
###### Potion Of Intelligence

**Aspects**

-   Potion In A Flask
-   Faintly Magical (Divine)

**Benefit**

-   A character may drink the potion as an action to \'cast\' the spell
    Divine Intelligence on themselves. Treat this as if the create
    advantage attempt succeeded and the resulting spell Aspect has
    two (2) invokes.

**Uses**

-   \[1\]

Each usage box indicates a seperate use or application and each use
expends a usage box; when there are none left the item is expended.

:::description
###### Divine Intelligence

Divine Spell (Blessing), Buff

Create advantage while Carefully Divine vs an Average (+1) difficulty to
create a spell Aspect on myself called **Divine Intelligence** for one
(1) scene or until all invocations are used. While this Aspect is active
my mind is sharper and I am smarter than I normally am. I may invoke
this Aspect to grant myself +1 Clever for three (3) consecutive
exchanges.
:::
:::

:::description
###### Potion Of Shield

**Aspects**

-   Potion In A Flask
-   Faintly Magical (Abjuration)

**Benefit**

-   A character may drink the potion as an action to \'cast\' the spell
    Shield on themselves. Treat this as if the create advantage attempt
    succeeded and the resulting spell Aspect has two (2) invokes.

**Uses**

-   \[1\]

Each usage box indicates a seperate use or application and each use
expends a usage box; when there are none left the item is expended.

:::description
###### Shield

Arcane Spell (Abjuration), Force

Create advantage while Carefully Arcane vs an Average (+1) difficulty to
apply the spell Aspect **Magic Shield** to myself. While this Aspect is
active I reduce damage from physical and magical attacks by one (1).
This Aspect may also be invoked to offer protection when defending from
physical or magical harm.
:::
:::

:::description
###### Potion Of Speed

**Aspects**

-   Potion In A Flask
-   Faintly Magical (Transmutation)

**Benefit**

-   A character may drink the potion as an action to \'cast\' the spell
    Arcane Speed on themselves. Treat this as if the create advantage
    attempt succeeded and the resulting spell Aspect has two (2)
    invokes.

**Uses**

-   \[1\]

Each usage box indicates a seperate use or application and each use
expends a usage box; when there are none left the item is expended.

:::description
###### Arcane Speed

Arcane Spell (Transmutation), Buff

Create advantage while Carefully Arcane vs an Average (+1) difficulty to
create a spell Aspect on myself called **Arcane Speed** for one (1)
scene or until all invocations are used. While this Aspect is active I
am faster than I normally am. I may invoke this Aspect to go first in an
exchange or to move an extra zone and still attack, or invoke it twice
to do both at the same time (this is an exception to the general rule
about invoking an Aspect twice for the same action, as it does two
different things when invoked in this way).
:::
:::

:::description
###### Potion Of Stealth

**Aspects**

-   Potion In A Flask
-   Faintly Magical (Transmutation)

**Benefit**

-   A character may drink the potion as an action to \'cast\' the spell
    Arcane Stealth on themselves. Treat this as if the create advantage
    attempt succeeded and the resulting spell Aspect has two (2)
    invokes.

**Uses**

-   \[1\]

Each usage box indicates a seperate use or application and each use
expends a usage box; when there are none left the item is expended.

:::description
###### Arcane Stealth

Arcane Spell (Transmutation), Buff

Create advantage while Carefully Arcane vs an Average (+1) difficulty to
create a spell Aspect on myself called **Arcane Stealth** for one (1)
scene or until all invocations are used. While this Aspect is active I
am more stealthy than I normally am. I may invoke this Aspect to grant
myself +1 Sneaky for three (3) consecutive exchanges.
:::
:::

:::description
###### Potion Of Strength

**Aspects**

-   Potion In A Flask
-   Faintly Magical (Divine)

**Benefit**

A character may drink the potion as an action to \'cast\' the spell
Divine Strength on themselves. Treat this as if the create advantage
attempt succeeded and the resulting spell Aspect has two (2) invokes.

**Uses**

-   \[1\]

Each usage box indicates a seperate use or application and each use
expends a usage box; when there are none left the item is expended.

:::description
###### Divine Strength

Divine Spell (Blessing), Buff

Create advantage while Carefully Divine vs an Average (+1) difficulty to
create a spell Aspect on myself called **Divine Strength** for one (1)
scene or until all invocations are used. While this Aspect is active I
am much stronger than I normally am. I may invoke this Aspect to grant
myself +1 Forceful for three (3) consecutive exchanges.
:::
:::

:::description
###### Potion Of Wisdom

**Aspects**

-   Potion In A Flask
-   Faintly Magical (Divine)

**Benefit**

-   A character may drink the potion as an action to \'cast\' the spell
    Divine Wisdom on themselves. Treat this as if the create advantage
    attempt succeeded and the resulting spell Aspect has two (2)
    invokes.

**Uses**

-   \[1\]

Each usage box indicates a seperate use or application and each use
expends a usage box; when there are none left the item is expended.

:::description
###### Divine Wisdom

Divine Spell (Blessing), Buff

Create advantage while Carefully Divine vs an Average (+1) difficulty to
create a spell Aspect on myself called **Divine Wisdom** for one (1)
scene or until all invocations are used. While this Aspect is active I
am wiser and more intuitive than I normally am. I may invoke this Aspect
to grant myself +1 Careful for three (3) consecutive exchanges.
:::
:::

### Healing Potions

Potions that heal damage, restore vitality, cure poisons, or otherwise
improve the health of the person consuming them..

:::description
###### Potion Of Cure Critical Wounds

**Aspects**

-   Potion In A Flask
-   Faintly Magical (Healing)

**Benefit**

-   A character may drink the potion as an action to \'cast\' the spell Heal
    on themselves. Treat this as if the overcome attempt succeeded with six
    (6) shifts of effect, and also clear all of the character\'s stress
    boxes.

**Uses**

-   \[1\]

Each usage box indicates a seperate use or application and each use
expends a usage box; when there are none left the item is expended.

:::description
###### Heal

Divine Spell (Healing)

While Carefully Divine attempt to clear a specific stress box or
Consequence by overcoming a difficulty equal to the numerical value of
the stress box or Consequence.
:::
:::

:::description
###### Potion Of Cure Light Wounds

**Aspects**

-   Potion In A Flask
-   Faintly Magical (Healing)

**Benefit**

-   A character may drink the potion as an action to \'cast\' the spell
    Heal on themselves. Treat this as if the overcome attempt succeeded
    with two (2) shifts of effect.

**Uses**

-   \[1\]

Each usage box indicates a seperate use or application and each use
expends a usage box; when there are none left the item is expended.

:::description
###### Heal

Divine Spell (Healing)

While Carefully Divine attempt to clear a specific stress box or
Consequence by overcoming a difficulty equal to the numerical value of
the stress box or Consequence.
:::
:::

:::description
###### Potion Of Cure Moderate Wounds

**Aspects**

-   Potion In A Flask
-   Faintly Magical (Healing)

**Benefit**

-   A character may drink the potion as an action to \'cast\' the spell
    Heal on themselves. Treat this as if the overcome attempt succeeded
    with four (4) shifts of effect.

**Uses**

-   \[1\]

Each usage box indicates a seperate use or application and each use
expends a usage box; when there are none left the item is expended.

:::description
###### Heal

Divine Spell (Healing)

While Carefully Divine attempt to clear a specific stress box or
Consequence by overcoming a difficulty equal to the numerical value of
the stress box or Consequence.
:::
:::

:::description
###### Potion Of Cure Severe Wounds

**Aspects**

-   Potion In A Flask
-   Faintly Magical (Healing)

**Benefit**

-   A character may drink the potion as an action to \'cast\' the spell
    Heal on themselves. Treat this as if the overcome attempt succeeded
    with six (6) shifts of effect.

**Uses**

-   \[1\]

Each usage box indicates a seperate use or application and each use
expends a usage box; when there are none left the item is expended.

:::description
###### Heal

Divine Spell (Healing)

While Carefully Divine attempt to clear a specific stress box or
Consequence by overcoming a difficulty equal to the numerical value of
the stress box or Consequence.
:::
:::

:::description
###### Potion Of Greater Restoration

**Aspects**

-   Potion In A Flask
-   Faintly Magical (Healing)

**Benefit**

-   A character may drink the potion as an action to \'cast\' the spell
    Greater Restoration on themselves. Treat this as if the overcome
    attempt succeeded.

**Uses**

-   \[1\]

Each usage box indicates a seperate use or application and each use
expends a usage box; when there are none left the item is expended.

:::description
###### Greater Restoration

Divine Spell (Healing)

Overcome while Carefully Divine vs a Legendary (+8) difficulty to remove
all debilitating situational Aspects currently affecting the target\'s
health or normal functioning that have a difficulty to remove of Epic
(+7) or less. This does not work on environmental Aspects, scene
Aspects, or other situational Aspects that affect the target externally,
it only works against situational Aspects that affect them directly and
personally such as poison, fatigue, curses, and so forth.
:::
:::

:::description
###### Potion Of Lesser Restoration

**Aspects**

-   Potion In A Flask
-   Faintly Magical (Healing)

**Benefit**

-   A character may drink the potion as an action to \'cast\' the spell
    Lesser Restoration on themselves. Treat this as if the overcome
    attempt succeeded.

**Uses**

-   \[1\]

Each usage box indicates a seperate use or application and each use
expends a usage box; when there are none left the item is expended.

:::description
###### Lesser Restoration

Divine Spell (Healing)

Overcome while Carefully Divine vs a Great (+4) difficulty to remove all
debilitating situational Aspects currently affecting the target\'s
health or normal functioning that have a difficulty to remove of Good
(+3) or less. This does not work on environmental Aspects, scene
Aspects, or other situational Aspects that affect the target externally,
it only works against situational Aspects that affect them directly and
personally such as poison, fatigue, curses, and so forth.
:::
:::

:::description
###### Potion Of Restoration

**Aspects**

-   Potion In A Flask
-   Faintly Magical (Healing)

**Benefit**

-   A character may drink the potion as an action to \'cast\' the spell
    Restoration on themselves. Treat this as if the overcome attempt
    succeeded.

**Uses**

-   \[1\]

Each usage box indicates a seperate use or application and each use
expends a usage box; when there are none left the item is expended.

:::description
###### Restoration

Divine Spell (Healing)

Overcome while Carefully Divine vs a Fantastic (+6) difficulty to remove
all debilitating situational Aspects currently affecting the target\'s
health or normal functioning that have a difficulty to remove of Superb
(+5) or less. This does not work on environmental Aspects, scene
Aspects, or other situational Aspects that affect the target externally,
it only works against situational Aspects that affect them directly and
personally such as poison, fatigue, curses, and so forth.
:::
:::

## Rings

Enchanted rings are a favorite and convenient to use magic item which
vary in power from mere trinkets to artifacts of unimaginable might.

:::description
**Ring Of Electricity Resistance**: Because I have a magical ring that
protects me, while I wear it I am immune to electricity and I take no
ill effect from any attack that relies on electricity.
:::

## Scrolls

Scrolls are basically spells trapped on paper just waiting to be cast by
a knowledgeable user.. Scrolls require at least +1 in an applicable
spell casting Archetype to use.

When a character uses this sort of Scroll, they are actually casting the
spell using the [Simple Magic Guidelines](#simple-magic-guidelines).
Scrolls generally grant a flat +4 bonus if they require a specific
Approach and Archetype combination be used while casting, or a +2 bonus
if they only require a Archetype and can be used with any Approach.

However, and this is important, preparing a Scroll for use takes an
action. Thus to cast a spell from a Scroll requires an action to get it
out and prepare to use it, and an action to use it. Thus the large bonus
is factored against the loss of action economy.

A character can declare that they are preparing a Scroll before a
conflict starts if they had reason to believe that it would be
adviseable to do so and had time to prepare in the scene leading up to
the conflict. This indicates that the Scroll is out and opened (or on
display) and the character is poised to cast from it.

### Arcane Scrolls

:::description
###### Scroll Of Arcane Bolt

**Aspects**

-   Magical Spell Trapped On Paper
-   Faintly Magical (Evocation)

**Benefit**

-   +4 to cast Arcane Bolt

**Uses**

-   \[1\]

Each usage box indicates a seperate use or application and each use
expends a usage box; when there are none left the item is expended.

This item requires Arcane +1 or better to use.

:::description
###### Arcane Bolt

Arcane Spell (Evocation), Force

While Forcefully Arcane I may attack a target within two (2) zones with
a bolt of pure eldritch **force**. I may also attack targets further
away with this spell, taking a -1 shift penalty for each additional two
(2) zones between us. If I succeed with style I cannot reduce the stress
to gain a boost, but if my target defends against this attack with style
they do not get a boost either.
:::
:::

:::description
###### Scroll Of Blur

**Aspects**

-   Magical Spell Trapped On Paper
-   Faintly Magical (Illusion)

**Benefit**

-   +4 to cast Blur.

**Uses**

-   \[1\]

Each usage box indicates a seperate use or application and each use
expends a usage box; when there are none left the item is expended.

This item requires Arcane +1 or better to use.

:::description
###### Blur

Arcane Spell (Illusion), Glamer

Create advantage while Cleverly Arcane vs an Average (+1) difficulty to
attach the spell Aspect **I\'m So Blurry** to myself. While this Aspect
is active it is difficult for opponents to see or target me clearly, and
all attempts to notice me via sight or directly affect me suffer a -2
penalty; this does not work against area affecting abilities. I may
invoke this Aspect to gain a bonus on actions where my blurriness and
indistinct outline benefit me, such as to defend against attacks or to
avoid being recognized.
:::
:::

:::description
###### Scroll Of Chained Lightning

**Aspects**

-   Magical Spell Trapped On Paper
-   Faintly Magical (Evocation)

**Benefit**

-   +4 to cast Chained Lightning.

**Uses**

-   \[1\]

Each usage box indicates a seperate use or application and each use
expends a usage box; when there are none left the item is expended.

This item requires Arcane +1 or better to use.

:::description
###### Chained Lightning

Arcane Spell (Evocation), Electricity

While Flashily Arcane I may attack one or more targets in my zone or an
adjacent zone. If I split shifts between multiple targets, the targets
each suffer a -1 penalty to defend against my attack.
:::
:::

:::description
###### Scroll Of Charm Person

**Aspects**

-   Magical Spell Trapped On Paper
-   Faintly Magical (Enchantment)

**Benefit**

-   +4 to cast Charm Person

**Uses**

-   \[1\]

Each usage box indicates a seperate use or application and each use
expends a usage box; when there are none left the item is expended.

This item requires Arcane +1 or better to use.

:::description
###### Charm Person

Arcane Spell (Enchantment), Mind-Affecting

Create advantage while Sneakily Arcane vs an Average (+1) difficulty to
create a spell Aspect on myself called **Arcanely Charming** for one (1)
scene or until all invocations are used. While this Aspect is active I
may add my Arcane Archetype to my Roguish Archetype in social
encounters. Also I may invoke this Aspect to grant myself bonuses when
attempting to charm people, such as when creating advantage to make
others want to help or cooperate with me.
:::
:::

:::description
###### Scroll Of Dimension Door

**Aspects**

-   Magical Spell Trapped On Paper
-   Faintly Magical (Universal)

**Benefit**

-   +4 to cast Dimension Door.

**Uses**

-   \[1\]

Each usage box indicates a seperate use or application and each use
expends a usage box; when there are none left the item is expended.

This item requires Arcane +1 or better to use.

:::description
###### Dimension Door

Arcane Spell (Universal), Teleportation

Overcome while Cleverly Arcane to immediately teleport myself a short
distance by overcoming a difficulty equal to the number of zones away
the target is, +1. Thus to dimension door up to three (3) zones away
would require me to overcome a Great (+4) difficulty, while five (5)
zones would require me to overcome a Fantastic (+6) difficulty. When
using this ability, I can not move a zone in the normal way, and if I
fail the spell I go nowhere at all.
:::
:::

:::description
###### Scroll Of Dispel Magic

**Aspects**

-   Magical Spell Trapped On Paper
-   Faintly Magical (Abjuration)

**Benefit**

-   +2 to cast Dispel Magic.

**Uses**

-   \[1\]

Each usage box indicates a seperate use or application and each use
expends a usage box; when there are none left the item is expended.

This item requires Arcane +1 or better to use.

:::description
###### Dispel Magic

Arcane Spell (Abjuration), Dispel

Dispelling magic is handled using the overcome action.
:::
:::

:::description
###### Scroll Of Expeditious Movement

**Aspects**

-   Magical Spell Trapped On Paper
-   Faintly Magical (Transmutation)

**Benefit**

-   +2 to cast Expeditious Movement.

**Uses**

-   \[1\]

Each usage box indicates a seperate use or application and each use
expends a usage box; when there are none left the item is expended.

This item requires Arcane +1 or better to use.

:::description
###### Expeditious Movement

Arcane Spell (Transmutation), Buff

Create advantage while Arcane vs an Average (+1) difficulty to create a
spell Aspect on myself called **Expeditious Movement** for one (1) scene
or until all invocations are used. I may invoke this Aspect to move one
additional zone or to gain a +2 bonus to overcome obstacles to my
movement.
:::
:::

:::description
###### Scroll Of Firewall

**Aspects**

-   Magical Spell Trapped On Paper
-   Faintly Magical (Evocation), Fire

**Benefit**

-   +4 to cast Firewall.

**Uses**

-   \[1\]

Each usage box indicates a seperate use or application and each use
expends a usage box; when there are none left the item is expended.

This item requires Arcane +1 or better to use.

:::description
###### Firewall

Arcane Spell (Evocation), Fire

While Flashily Arcane I may create advantage vs a Fair (+2) difficulty
to attach the spell Aspect **Wall Of Fire!** to three contiguous zones
within two zones of me; the level of effect attained should be noted on
the Aspect. While this Aspect is active it provides active defense to
any target that is targeted across the wall\'s area. Additionally, when
people or large objects pass through the wall it is automatically
invoked to attack them with a bonus equal to the number of shifts
attained when the Aspect was put into play.
:::
:::

:::description
###### Scroll Of Expeditious Movement

**Aspects**

-   Magical Spell Trapped On Paper
-   Faintly Magical (Transmutation)

**Benefit**

-   +2 to cast Flying.

**Uses**

-   \[1\]

Each usage box indicates a seperate use or application and each use
expends a usage box; when there are none left the item is expended.

This item requires Arcane +1 or better to use.

:::description
###### Flying

Arcane Spell (Transmutation), Buff

Create advantage while Arcane vs a Fair (+2) difficulty to create a
spell Aspect on myself called **At-Will Flight** for one (1) scene or
until all invocations are used. While this Aspect is active I can fly at
will. While flying I am unaffected by obstacles that I can reasonably
fly over, and I can hover out of easy reach of the ground thus
frustrating melee attackers. Additionally when moving one or more (1+)
zones I may move one (1) additional zone. I may invoke this Aspect to
move one (1) additional zone or to gain a +2 bonus to overcome obstacles
to my movement.
:::
:::

:::description
###### Scroll Of Glimmerdust

**Aspects**

-   Magical Spell Trapped On Paper, Faintly Magical (Transmutation)

**Benefit**

-   +4 to cast Glimmerdust.

**Uses**

-   \[1\]

Each usage box indicates a seperate use or application and each use
expends a usage box; when there are none left the item is expended.

This item requires Arcane +1 or better to use.

:::description
###### Glimmerdust

Arcane Spell (Conjuration), Creation, Zone

Create advantage while Flashily Arcane vs an Average (+1) difficulty to
conjure a dust or powder like substance that immediately catalyzes with
a glimmering sparkle that coats everything in the zone and disrupts most
invisibility and stealth related effects in my zone or an adjacent zone.
I take a -1 penalty on my roll, but I add the spell Aspect
**Glimmerdusted** to anyone in the affected zone that has an
Invisibility related (or similar effect) Aspect active. While someone
has one of these spell Aspects active on them their Invisibility Aspect
is suppressed; each exchange each of these Aspects is automatically
invoked to continue suppressing relevant Invisibility effects. Each
spell Aspect lasts until there are no invokes remaining.
:::
:::

:::description
###### Scroll Of Mage Armor

**Aspects**

-   Magical Spell Trapped On Paper
-   Faintly Magical (Conjuration)

**Benefit**

-   +4 to cast Mage Armor.

**Uses**

-   \[1\]

Each usage box indicates a seperate use or application and each use
expends a usage box; when there are none left the item is expended.

This item requires Arcane +1 or better to use.

:::description
###### Mage Armor

Arcane Spell (Conjuration), Force

Create advantage while Carefully Arcane vs an Average (+1) difficulty to
apply the spell Aspect **Mage Armor** to myself. While this Aspect is
active I can justify using Arcane to defend against physical attacks.
This Aspect may also be invoked to offer protection when defending from
physical or magical harm.
:::
:::

:::description
###### Scroll Of Mirror Image

**Aspects**

-   Magical Spell Trapped On Paper
-   Faintly Magical (Illusion)

**Benefit**

-   +4 to cast Mirror Image.

**Uses**

-   \[1\]

Each usage box indicates a seperate use or application and each use
expends a usage box; when there are none left the item is expended.

This item requires Arcane +1 or better to use.

:::description
###### Mirror Images

Arcane Spell (Illusion), Figment

Create Advantage while Sneakily Arcane vs an Average (+1) difficulty to
attach the spell Aspect **Mirror Images** to myself to create one Mirror
Image construct which is an illusory duplicate of myself that stays near
me doing its best to confuse others as to which of us is real. I can
create additional Mirror Image constructs by allocating one (1) extra
shift for each. See the Mirror Images servitor profile for details.

Servitors are explained in the [Simple Magic
Guidelines](#simple-magic-guidelines).

:::description
###### Mirror Image

**Summoning Difficulty**

-   +1

**Aspects**

-   Just An Illusionary Duplicate
-   Glamour
-   Obedient

**Good At**

-   Looking Like Caster (+3)
-   Distracting (+1)

**Bad At**

    Mirror Images do not actually exist and can't do anything other than
    confuse and distract attackers.

**Hits**

-   \[1\]
:::
:::
:::

:::description
###### Scroll Of Prismatic Spray

**Aspects**

-   Magical Spell Trapped On Paper, Faintly Magical (Transmutation)

**Benefit**

-   +4 to cast Prismatic Spray.

**Uses**

-   \[1\]

Each usage box indicates a seperate use or application and each use
expends a usage box; when there are none left the item is expended.

This item requires Arcane +1 or better to use.

:::description
###### Prismatic Spray

Arcane Spell (Illusion), Glamer

Create advantage while Flashily Arcane vs an Average (+1) difficulty to
create a spell Aspect on a target within one zone called **Bedazzled!**
for one (1) scene or until all invocations are used. While the Aspect is
active the target is partially blinded by brightly colored glittery
spots of light that dance before their eyes; the target suffers a -2
penalty on all notice attempts and attacks that rely on sight. Anyone
attacking or acting against the target may invoke this Aspect against
the target to take advantage of their temporary blindness.
:::
:::

:::description
###### Scroll Of Shield

**Aspects**

-   Magical Spell Trapped On Paper
-   Faintly Magical (Abjuration)

**Benefit**

-   +4 to cast Shield.

**Uses**

-   \[1\]

Each usage box indicates a seperate use or application and each use
expends a usage box; when there are none left the item is expended.

This item requires Arcane +1 or better to use.

:::description
###### Shield

Arcane Spell (Abjuration), Force

Create advantage while Carefully Arcane vs an Average (+1) difficulty to
apply the spell Aspect **Magic Shield** to myself. While this Aspect is
active I reduce damage from physical and magical attacks by one (1).
This Aspect may also be invoked to offer protection when defending from
physical or magical harm.
:::
:::

:::description
###### Scroll Of Slow

**Aspects**

-   Magical Spell Trapped On Paper
-   Faintly Magical (Transmutation)

**Benefit**

-   +2 to cast Slow.

**Uses**

-   \[1\]

Each usage box indicates a seperate use or application and each use
expends a usage box; when there are none left the item is expended.

This item requires Arcane +1 or better to use.

:::description
###### Slow

Arcane Spell (Transmutation), Debuff

Create advantage while Arcane vs an Average (+1) difficulty on a target
that I can detect within two (2) zones. If I am successful I attach the
spell Aspect **Soooooo Sloooooow!** to the target. While this Aspect is
active the target can move one (1) fewer zones per exchange and cannot
move a zone and attack.
:::
:::

:::description
###### Scroll Of Water Breathing

**Aspects**

-   Magical Spell Trapped On Paper
-   Faintly Magical (Transmutation)

**Benefit**

-   +2 to cast Water Breathing.

**Uses**

-   \[1\]

Each usage box indicates a seperate use or application and each use
expends a usage box; when there are none left the item is expended.

This item requires Arcane +1 or better to use.

:::description
###### Water Breathing

Arcane Spell (Transmutation), Buff

Create advantage while Arcane to apply the spell Aspect **Magical Water
Breathing** to myself. I may invoke this Aspect to breathe underwater
for a scene.
:::
:::

### Divine Scrolls

:::description
###### Scroll Of Heal

**Aspects**

-   Magical Spell Trapped On Paper
-   Faintly Magical (Divine)

**Benefit**

-   +4 to cast Heal

**Uses**

-   \[1\]

Each usage box indicates a seperate use or application and each use
expends a usage box; when there are none left the item is expended.

This item requires Divine +1 or better to use.

:::description
###### Heal

Divine Spell (Healing)

While Carefully Divine attempt to clear a specific stress box or
Consequence by overcoming a difficulty equal to the numerical value of
the stress box or Consequence.
:::
:::

:::description
###### Scroll Of Protection From Harm

**Aspects**

-   Magical Spell Trapped On Paper
-   Faintly Magical (Divine)

**Benefit**

-   +4 to cast Protection From Harm.

**Uses**

-   \[1\]

Each usage box indicates a seperate use or application and each use
expends a usage box; when there are none left the item is expended.

This item requires Divine +1 or better to use.

:::description
###### Protection From Harm

Divine Spell (Protective)

Create advantage while Carefully Divine vs an Average (+1) difficulty to
apply the spell Aspect **Protection From Harm** to myself or someone
else in my zone. While this Aspect is active the person it is attached
to can justify defending against all abilities that would cause physical
or magical harm used by those with an outlook or innate nature that is
at odds with my faith and my diety\'s purview. Additionally, the
recipient of the spell Aspect gains +2 when attempting to overcome
mind-affecting effects. This Aspect may also be invoked to offer further
protection when defending from physical or magical harm. The Aspect
lasts for a scene or until no invokes remain.
:::
:::

:::description
###### Scroll Of Searing Light

**Aspects**

-   Magical Spell Trapped On Paper
-   Faintly Magical (Divine)

**Benefit**

-   +4 to cast Arcane Bolt

**Uses**

-   \[1\]

Each usage box indicates a seperate use or application and each use
expends a usage box; when there are none left the item is expended.

This item requires Divine +1 or better to use.

:::description
###### Purifying Light

Divine Spell (Light), Positive

While Flashily Divine I may attack a target within two (2) zones with a
ray of blindingly bright and searingly hot **positive energy**. If I
succeed with style I must reduce the stress by one (1) shift to gain a
boost but the boost is upgraded to the situational Aspect **Blinded By
The Light!** with two (2) invokes. While this Aspect is active the
target cannot notice things via vision. The Aspect can be invoked by
anyone to hinder the target as appropriate. The Aspect can be overcome
by healing magics or the use of unusual senses with a difficulty
determined by the GM.
:::
:::

:::description
###### Scroll Of True Seeing

**Aspects**

-   Magical Spell Trapped On Paper
-   Faintly Magical (Divine)

**Benefit**

-   +4 to cast True Seeing.

**Uses**

-   \[1\]

Each usage box indicates a seperate use or application and each use
expends a usage box; when there are none left the item is expended.

This item requires Divine +1 or better to use.

:::description
###### True Seeing

Divine Spell (Knowledge)

Create advantage while Cleverly Divine vs a Good (+3) difficulty to
create a spell Aspect on myself called **True Seeing** for one (1) scene
or until all invocations are used. While this Aspect is active I may
perceive things that require mystical senses to perceive and I may use
Divine instead of Focused to notice things. I may also use my Divine
capability to defend against mind-affecting effects and illusions, and
to perceive that which is invisible. I may also invoke this Aspect to
gain a bonus when attempting any of these things.
:::
:::

## Staffs

Staves are usually mighty magic items, often favored by wizards and
other serious magic users.

:::description
**Staff of Eldritch Forces (-2)**: Because I weild a Staff of Eldritch
Forces, I may call upon its powerful magics to aid me in my adventures.
See the Staff of Eldritch Forces write-up for details. The staff can be
disarmed or temporarily taken from me and I am unable to use its
abilities until I get it back.

:::description
###### Staff of Eldritch Forces

**Aspects**

-   Impressive Looking
-   Strongly Magical (Arcane)

**Benefits**

-   **Force Aura**: Because the staff\'s powerful magics ward off
    attacks, I gain +1 to defend against all physical and magical
    attacks while brandishing the staff.
-   **Focus Force**: Because the staff\'s magics help me focus mystical
    energies into force effects, I gain +1 shift of effect when I
    successfully cast a spell that has a **Forc** Aspect while
    brandishing the staff.
-   **Disperse Force Construct**: Because the staff\'s magics are
    specialized to this purpose, once per session I may remove a Force
    related situational Aspect (such as a Forcewall construct) from
    play. Alternately I may cancel an attack with a Force Aspect that
    targets me or something within one zone of me.

This item requires Arcane +3 or better to use.
:::
:::

:::description
**Staff Of Evocation**: Because I bear a Staff of Evocation, a powerful
magical staff, I gain +2 while Forcefully Arcane to project a beam of
searing energy as an attack against a target within four zones of me.
The staff can be disarmed or temporarily taken from me and I am unable
to use its abilities until I get it back.
:::

:::description
**Staff Of Smiting**: Because I bear a Staff of Smiting, a powerful
magical staff, I gain +3 while Forcefully Divine to strike down a foe
within my zone whose nature is anathemic to my patron deity; further if
my attack inflicts a consequence I gain an additional free invoke on it.
The staff can be disarmed or temporarily taken from me and I am unable
to use its abilities until I get it back.
:::

:::description
**Staff of the Arcanist (-2)**: Because I weild a Staff of the Arcanist,
I may call upon its powerful magics to aid me in my adventures. See the
Staff of the Arcanist write-up for details. The staff can be disarmed or
temporarily taken from me and I am unable to use its abilities until I
get it back.

:::description
###### Staff of the Arcanist

**Aspects**

-   Impressive Looking
-   Strongly Magical (Arcane)

**Benefits**

-   +1 while Arcane
-   Once per session if an opposing Arcanist targets me with an Arcane
    spell I may choose a new target for the spell (including the caster)
    against whom the spell has its full normal effect
-   While Forcefully Arcane I may overcome a Legendary (+8) difficulty
    to break the staff and unleash raw magical energies that I may
    channel into an Arcane spell of my choice that I immediately cast
    with a +10 bonus; if I do this the staff is permanently destroyed
    and it will take at least two minor milestones or a significant
    milestone for me to change the related Stunt to one or two other
    Stunts

This item requires Arcane +3 or better to use.
:::
:::

:::description
**Staff of the Crafty Raven**: Because I weild a Staff of the Crafty
Raven, I may call upon its powerful magics to aid me in my adventures.
See the Staff of the Crafty Raven write up for details. The staff can be
disarmed or temporarily taken from me and I am unable to use its
abilities until I get it back.

:::description
###### Staff of the Crafty Raven

**Aspects**

-   Elegant But Harmless Looking
-   Faintly Magical (Abjuration, Transmutation, Illusion)

**Benefits**

-   **Crafty Competence**: While I am being Clever, Roguish, or Arcane
    when I spend a Fate point to reroll a 4dF resolution I may instead
    proceed as if I had rolled +1 on the reroll.
-   **Uncanny Avoidance**: Once per session if I would take a
    consequence I may instead draw upon the magic of the staff to avoid
    the consequence. To observers it appears as if I am invulnerable or
    unaffected, whichever better fits the narrative.
:::
:::

:::description
**Staff of the Healer (-2)**: Because I weild a Staff of the Healer, I
may call upon its powerful restorative magics to aid my allies and the
injured. See the Staff of the Healer write-up for details. The staff can
be disarmed or temporarily taken from me and I am unable to use its
abilities until I get it back.

:::description
###### Staff of the Healer

**Aspects**

-   Stately and Comforting
-   Strongly Magical (Divine)

**Benefits**

-   +1 while Divine
-   Once per conflict I may clear a Mild consequence pertaining to
    physical or mental damage from any target other than myself in my
    same zone by touching them with the staff. Alternately, I can spend
    a Fate point to clear a Moderate conseqence instead
-   Once per session I may clear a Moderate consequence pertaining to
    physical or mental damage from any target other than myself in my
    same zone by touching them with the staff. Alternately, I can spend
    a Fate point clear a Severe consquence instead

This item requires Divine +3 or better to use.
:::
:::

:::description
**Staff of the North**: Because I have a Staff of the North, a magical
staff attuned to bitter elemental cold and arctic climates, I gain +1
while Cleverly Primal to project blasts of penetrating cold and sharp
chunks of ice as an attack against a target within one zone of me.
Additionally, while I carry the staff I am unaffected by extreme cold, I
can walk on top of snow and ice without penalty, and I gain a +1 bonus
to defend against extreme heat and flames. The staff can be disarmed or
temporarily taken from me and I am unable to use its abilities until I
get it back.
:::

## Wands

### Arcane Wands

:::description
###### Wand Of Acidic Arrow

**Aspects**

-   Magical Spell Trapped In A Stick
-   Faintly Magical (Conjuration)

**Benefit**

-   +1 to cast Acidic Arrow.

**Uses**

-   \[1\]

Each usage box indicates a seperate use or application and each use
expends a usage box; when there are none left the item is expended.

This item requires Arcane +1 or better to use.

:::description
###### Acidic Arrow

Arcane Spell (Conjuration), Acid

While Carefully Arcane I may attack a target within two (2) zones with a
conjured blob of acidic goo. If I get a boost using this attack I may
upgrade it to place the spell Aspect **Acidic Aftermath** to the target,
which is invoked at the beginning of each of the target\'s turns to
inflict one (1) additional shift of stress from acid damage on the
target. This Aspect can be removed by various means by overcoming a
Great (+4) difficulty.
:::
:::

:::description
###### Wand Of Arcane Bolt

**Aspects**

-   Magical Spell Trapped In A Stick
-   Faintly Magical (Evocation)

**Benefit**

-   +1 to cast Arcane Bolt.

**Uses**

-   \[1\]

Each usage box indicates a seperate use or application and each use
expends a usage box; when there are none left the item is expended.

This item requires Arcane +1 or better to use.

:::description
###### Arcane Bolt

Arcane Spell (Evocation), Force

While Forcefully Arcane I may attack a target within two (2) zones with
a bolt of pure eldritch **force**. I may also attack targets further
away with this spell, taking a -1 shift penalty for each additional two
(2) zones between us. If I succeed with style I cannot reduce the stress
to gain a boost, but if my target defends against this attack with style
they do not get a boost either.
:::
:::

:::description
###### Wand Of Chained Lightning

**Aspects**

-   Magical Spell Trapped In A Stick
-   Faintly Magical (Evocation)

**Benefit**

-   +1 to cast Chained Lightning.

**Uses**

-   \[1\]

Each usage box indicates a seperate use or application and each use
expends a usage box; when there are none left the item is expended.

This item requires Arcane +1 or better to use.

:::description
###### Chained Lightning

Arcane Spell (Evocation), Electricity

While Flashily Arcane I may attack one or more targets in my zone or an
adjacent zone. If I split shifts between multiple targets, the targets
each suffer a -1 penalty to defend against my attack.
:::
:::

:::description
###### Wand Of Detect Secret Doors

**Aspects**

-   Magical Spell Trapped In A Stick, Faintly Magical (Divination)

**Benefit**

-   +1 to cast Detect Secret Doors.

**Uses**

-   \[1\]

Each usage box indicates a seperate use or application and each use
expends a usage box; when there are none left the item is expended.

This item requires Arcane +1 or better to use.

:::description
###### Detect Secret Doors

Arcane Spell (Divination)

I can use overcome while being Cleverly Arcane to notice hidden doors
(and similar difficulties) in my zone.
:::
:::

:::description
###### Wand Of Flying

**Aspects**

-   Magical Spell Trapped In A Stick
-   Faintly Magical (Transmutation)

**Benefit**

-   +1 to cast Flying.

**Uses**

-   \[1\]

Each usage box indicates a seperate use or application and each use
expends a usage box; when there are none left the item is expended.

This item requires Arcane +1 or better to use.

:::description
###### Flying

Arcane Spell (Transmutation), Buff

Create advantage while Arcane vs a Fair (+2) difficulty to create a
spell Aspect on myself called **At-Will Flight** for one (1) scene or
until all invocations are used. While this Aspect is active I can fly at
will. While flying I am unaffected by obstacles that I can reasonably
fly over, and I can hover out of easy reach of the ground thus
frustrating melee attackers. Additionally when moving one or more (1+)
zones I may move one (1) additional zone. I may invoke this Aspect to
move one (1) additional zone or to gain a +2 bonus to overcome obstacles
to my movement.
:::
:::

:::description
###### Wand Of Mage Armor

**Aspects**

-   Magical Spell Trapped In A Stick
-   Faintly Magical (Conjuration)

**Benefit**

-   +1 to cast Mage Armor.

**Uses**

-   \[1\]

Each usage box indicates a seperate use or application and each use
expends a usage box; when there are none left the item is expended.

This item requires Arcane +1 or better to use.

:::description
###### Mage Armor

Arcane Spell (Conjuration), Force

Create advantage while Carefully Arcane vs an Average (+1) difficulty to
apply the spell Aspect **Mage Armor** to myself. While this Aspect is
active I can justify using Arcane to defend against physical attacks.
This Aspect may also be invoked to offer protection when defending from
physical or magical harm.
:::
:::

### Primal Wands

:::description
###### Wand Of Produce Flame

**Aspects**

-   Magical Spell Trapped In A Stick
-   Faintly Magical (Evocation)

**Benefit**

-   +1 to cast Produce Flame.

**Uses**

-   \[1\]

Each usage box indicates a seperate use or application and each use
expends a usage box; when there are none left the item is expended.

This item requires Primal +1 or better to use.

:::description
###### Produce Flame

Primal Spell (Elemental), Fire

While Flashily Primal I may attack a target within three (3) zones with
a burst of flaming fire. If I succeed with style I must reduce the
stress by one (1) shift to gain a boost but the boost is upgraded to the
situational Aspect **On Fire!** with two (2) invokes, which is attached
to the target. This Aspect is automatically invoked at the beginning of
subsequent exchanges to inflict two (2) stress to the target per invoke.
It is a Fair (+2) difficulty to remove this Aspect.
:::
:::

:::description
###### Wand Of Tree Shape

**Aspects**

-   Magical Spell Trapped In A Stick
-   Faintly Magical (Transmutation)

**Benefit**

-   +1 to cast Tree Shape.

**Uses**

-   \[1\]

Each usage box indicates a seperate use or application and each use
expends a usage box; when there are none left the item is expended.

This item requires Primal +1 or better to use.

:::description
###### Tree Shape

Primal Spell (Plant)

Create advantage while Quickly Primal vs a Fair (+2) difficulty to apply
the spell Aspect **Tree Shape** on myself. While this Aspect is in play,
I am able to assume the form of a large living tree or shrub or a large
dead tree trunk. To all normal senses I appear to be nothing more than a
tree or shrub. Mystical senses or spells that detect magic or enhance
perception might be able to penetrate my magic; overcoming a Fantastic
(+6) difficulty allows a such an observer notice a faint but
indeterminant magical aura around me, and overcoming an Astonishing (+9)
difficulty reveals my true form. While in tree form, I can observe all
that transpires around me just as if I were in my normal form. All
clothing and gear carried or worn changes with me. I can return to my
normal form as a non action.
:::
:::

## Weapons

Magical weapons with unusual abilities are a common staple of fantasy
fiction. In Pathfinder Fate Accelerated, magical items are just part of
a given character\'s concept rather than loot to be acquired such as is
the case in the source material. They generally take the form of a Stunt
that grants access to a secondary character write-up.

:::description
**Bane Arrows**: Because I possess a clutch of Bane Arrows, I am
especially lethal against a specific kind of opponent when I use them.

:::description
###### Bane Arrow

**Aspects**

-   Faintly Magical (Necromancy, Transmutation)
-   Fell-looking

**Benefit**

-   +2 to attacking a target of the chosen type (+2), Range: four (4)
    zones

**Uses**

-   \[1\]

A Bane Arrow can only be destroyed by magic, but can be removed from
use. Each shot expends a usage box, but each arrow can be recovered and
thus restore a usage.
:::
:::

:::description
**Magical Weapon (-2)**: Because I have a mildly magical weapon, I gain
+1 when Combative to attack and defend while wielding it.
:::

:::description
**Magical Adamantine Dagger (-2)**: Because I have a mildly magical
weapon made of adamantine, while wielding it I may use Roguish in place
of Combatives and I gain +1 to attack.
:::

:::description
**Magical Dagger (-2)**: Because I have a mildly magical weapon, while
wielding it I may use Roguish in place of Combatives and I gain +1 to
attack.
:::

:::description
**Magical Longsword (-2)**: Because I have a magical weapon, I gain +1
when Combative to attack and defend while wielding it.
:::

:::description
**Returning Dagger**: Because I have a magical Returning Dagger, I am
able to annoy my foes with pinpricks.

:::description
###### Returning Dagger

**Aspects**

-   Returns To Weilder When Thrown
-   Faintly Magical

**Benefit**

-   +1 to attack by throwing the Dagger at them, Range: three (3) zones

**Bad At**

-   Hacking (-1)
-   Defending (-1)

**Stress**:

-   \[1\]\[2\]
-   Mild (2)

Returning Daggers can be thrown as an attack, and will return to the
thrower\'s hand afterwards. Annoying but useful.
:::
:::

:::description
**Runic Weapon Of Striking**: Because I have a Runic weapon bearing the
Rune Of Striking, if I succeed with style when attacking with it I
inflict +2 shifts of damage.
:::

:::description
**Unholy Bane Dagger**: Because I have a magical dagger \'blessed\' with
unholy bane, I inflict an extra shift of damage when I use it to
successfully attack devout followers of benign deities.
:::

### Named Weapons

Named weapons, usually unique, are the stuff of many legends. Typically
associated with one or more heroes, and perhaps a famous creator, these
special items are treasured not just for their magical might but also
for their historical legacy.

:::description
**Searing Guisarme**: Because I have a magical guisarme, I am able to
use its abilities to aid me in my adventures.

:::description
###### Searing Guisarme

**Aspects**

-   Magical Guisarme
-   Strong Magic (Evocation)

**Good At**

-   Sweeping Strikes (+2)

**Bad At**

-   Tight Spaces (-2)

**Stress**

-   \[1\]\[2\]\[3\]
-   Mild (2)

**Stunts**

-   **Searing Blade**: Because I have a magical glaive with fiery
    magical properties, if I succeed with style when attacking with it I
    inflict 1 additional shift of damage that cannot be reduced.
:::
:::

:::description
**Silverfang (-2)**: Because I have a powerful magical sword named
Silverfang, I am able to use its abilities to aid me in my adventures.

:::description
###### Silverfang

**Aspects**

-   Mithral Sword
-   Undead Bane

**Stress**: \[1\]\[2\]\[3\]

-   Mild (2)
-   Moderate (4)

**Stunts**

-   **Undead Bane**: Beacause I have special power over the undead, my
    weilder gains +1 to attack undead opponents.
-   **Halt Undead**: **Beacause I have special power over the undead, if
    I get a boost while attacking an undead opponent the boost is
    upgraded to the spell Aspect HALTED** which is attached to the
    target with one (1) invoke. The target cannot move or attack until
    the Aspect is removed. It can be overcome by the target while
    Focused as a Superb (+5) difficulty.
-   **Negative Energy Resistance**: Beacause I am enchanted with
    protective magics, anyone currently holding me gains +2 to defend
    against attacks and create advantage attempts that rely upon
    negative energy or necromancy.
:::
:::

## Wondrous Items

Wondrous magical items ranging from useful to ingenius to just plain
odd, and usually usable by anyone.

:::description
**Boots Of Str∆Ωiding And Springing**: Because I have a magical pair of
boots, when I wear them I am able to leap and run better than usual. If
I am in a conflict and do nothing in an exchange except move, I may move
three (3) zones instead of two (2) zones and I am unobstructed by minor
obstacles. If I am in a contest involving me running away or avoiding
capture, I gain +1 to overcome while I am Quickly Focused.
:::

:::description
**Bottomless Satchel**: Because I have a magical Bottomless Satchel that
is much bigger on the inside than on the outside, I can carry a large
amount of supplies as long as each item can fit through the opening of
the bag (which is about half a meter across at full expansion). I can
Carefully overcome against a Fair (+2) difficulty to retrieve anything
I\'ve explicitly put into it; failure just means I have to keep rooting
around looking for the item with additional actions. With the GM\'s
permission I can also spend a Fate point to pull out a mundane item that
can fit through the opening of the satchel that I haven\'t explictly put
in but \'happen to have\'.
:::

:::description
**Cloak Of Elvenkind**: Because I have a magical Cloak of Elvenkind, I
gain +1 when Sneaky to create advantage or overcome to avoid notice
while wearing it.
:::

:::description
**Cloak of Protection (-2)**: Because I have a Cloak of Protection that
offers me some protection, while wearing it I gain +1 to defend against
magic and if I take a consequence from a magical attack the attacker
does not get a free invoke on it.
:::

:::description
**Elemental Gem**: These magical gems contain a bound Large Elemental.
Each gem can only be used once, and are destroyed in the process
rendering them impractically expensive for mass consumption. However,
even a single use can have a significant impact on a confrontation,
making them quite useful in dire enough circumstances.

:::description
###### Elemental Gem

**Aspects**

-   Precious Gemstone
-   Moderately Magical (Conjuration, Elemental)

**Benefit**

-   A character may crush or break the Gem to release the Large
    Elemental trapped within it. The elemental follows the user\'s
    commands for one (1) scene, and then returns to their applicable
    elemental plane of origin.

**Uses**

-   \[1\]

Each usage box indicates a seperate use or application and each use
expends a usage box; when there are none left the item is expended.

Elemental Gems come in many varieties, one per kind of elemental. See
[Elementals](#elementals) for details on individual types of elementals
:::
:::

:::description
**Everburning Incense Box**: Because I have a magical Everburning
Incense Box that emits soothing cinnamon-scented smoke whenever I open
its lid, I can use it to aid me in certain situations. If I am able to
use it prior to a social encounter to prepare a room or chamber, I gain
(+1) to all subsequent social actions I take within the prepared area.
The benefit of the effect lasts for several minutes after the box is
closed, unless a strong wind or something similar clears the incense
from the room. Mystical senses can detect the subtle magic by overcoming
an Epic (+7) challenge, and it can be suppressed with dispelling magics
for a scene by overcoming a Superb (+5) challenge.
:::

:::description
**Goggles Of Night**: Because I have a pair of magical goggles I can see
perfectly in total darkness and gain +1 to defend against sight-based
attacks when I wear them.
:::

:::description
**Mask of Disguise (-2)**: Because I have a powerful magical item that
allows me to change my appearance, I may spend a Fate point to cause
myself to look like someone else for a scene or longer. My magical
disguise can be overcome by those with appropriate senses or magic
against a Legendary (+8) difficulty.
:::

:::description
**Headband of Vast Intellect**: Because I have a magical item that
boosts my intelligence, I gain +2 while Cleverly Focused to recall
obscure details, lore, or even general knowledge, and also when
attempting to figure things out via sheer intellect.
:::

:::description
**Immovable Rod**: Because I have a magical Immovable Rod, its special
magical abilities aid me in my adventures.

:::description
###### Immovable Rod

**Aspects**

-   Flat Iron Bar
-   Moderately Magical (Transmutation)

This rod is a flat iron bar with a small button on one end. When the
button is pushed the rod anchors itself in its current position and will
not budge, even if staying in place defies gravity.

Thus the owner can lift or place the rod wherever they can reach, push
the button, and let go leaving the rod anchored in place. Several
immovable rods can even make a ladder when used together (although only
two are strictly necessary).

The magic of one immovable rod can support up to five tons before
catastrophically failing, causing the rod to deactivate and cease
working. However, multiple immovable rods might be used in tandem to
support more weight.

Despite the seeming incongruity with the name it actually is possible to
move an activated immovable rod by overcoming a Wondrous (+10) challenge
while being Forcefully Focused. Success allows the rod to be moved up to
a foot, and each additional shift allows another three feet of distance.
The rod will remain in its new location after being moved in this way.
Of course this is largely irrelevant as a person with the ability to
manipulate the rod could simply turn it off, move it to the desired
location, and then turn it back on.
:::
:::

:::description
**Maiden\'s Helm (-2)**: Because I wear a magical helmet that radiates
intimidating and frightenting emanations, I gain +1 when being Forceful
and attempting to frighten or demoralize. Additionally it confers
greater power a few times per day.

:::description
###### Maiden\'s Helm

**Aspects**

-   Impressive Looking Silvery Helmet
-   Moderately Magical (Arcane)

**Uses**

-   \[1\]\[1\]\[1\]

+4 when Forcefully issuing verbal commands to an individual or a mob of
mooks in my zone or an adjacent zone. This is a mind-affecting Arcane
ability.
:::
:::

:::description
**Orb of Consumption**: Because I have a magical Orb of Consumption, its
special magical abilities aid me in my adventures.

:::description
###### Orb of Consumption

**Aspects**

-   Head-sized Hollow Sphere
-   Mind-Affecting, Sonic
-   Strongly Magical (Enchantment)

This cruel device could not seem less intimidating\-\--it appears as
nothing more frightening than a hollow sphere of pink glass the size of
a halfling\'s head. When it is held in both hands and its command word
is spoken, a pulsing light throbs at the core of the sphere and the
sound of an ongoing exhalation of breath emanates from the orb.

This effect lasts for as long as the user concentrates, spending their
entire turn to keep the orb activated.

Each turn that the user concentrates on keeping the orb activated, every
other character in their zone must overcome an Epic (+7) challenge; or a
Superb (+5) challenge if being Carefully Focused. Characters who succeed
can take their action as normal. Those who fail are compelled to use
their action to approach and touch the orb. Characters compelled in this
way may spend a Fate point to resist the effect and take their action
this turn as normal.

The orb itself inflicts an Epic (+7) magical attack on anyone other than
its user who fails to resist the orb\'s lure and makes physical contact
with the orb. The attack takes the form of enervating magic that saps a
victim\'s life force.

If the orb inflicts a consequence on any of its victims, it places the
spell Aspect **Consumed Lifeforce** on its user, or adds an additional
free invoke to the Aspect if it already exists. This Aspect can be
invoked by the orb\'s user whenever they are being Focused to improve
their chances of success.

The **Consumed Lifeforce** spell Aspect can be removed using appropriate
magic by overcoming an Epic (+7) difficulty.
:::
:::

:::description
**Wayfinder**: Because I own a Wayfinder, I am able to employ a useful
magical tool to help me in my adventures. See the Wayfinder write up for
details.

:::description
###### Wayfinder

**Aspects**

-   Faintly Magical (Evocation)
-   Fancy Compass

While it serves as a badge of office for agents of the Pathfinder
Society, a wayfinder is as much a handy tool as a status symbol. A
non-Pathfinder carrying one of these is likely to face complications if
it is noticed by actual Pathfinders.

**Illuminate**: **Using a command word I can activate my Wayfinder to
illuminate my zone and all adjacent zones unless obstructed, attaching
the situational Aspect Illuminating Wayfinder** to myself; I may
actively defend against attempts to overcome this Aspect with narrative
support.

**True North**: Using my Wayfinder as a compass I am able to determine
true north unless near a magnet or other disruptive force; I gain +1
while Carefully Focused to overcome being lost.

**Find A Way**: Once per session I may gain +1 while I am being Careful
or Clever and attempting an action; I may decide to use this ability
after I have already rolled a relevant 4dF roll and determined the total
number of shifts.
:::
:::

:::description
**Whispering Coin**: Because I have a magical Whispering Coin, its
special magical abilities aid me in my adventures.

:::description
###### Whispering Coin

**Aspects**

-   Ancient Thassilonian Relic
-   Strongly Magical (Divination)

This ancient gold coin measures an inch in diameter and a quarter of an
inch thick. One face bears one of the seven ancient runes representing
magic and sin, while the opposite side bears the image of a broken
column.

When carried, a whispering coin periodically haunts its carrier with
soft whispers that seem to be in an ancient language, but which are
never loud enough to understand.

Once per day, when the bearer flips the whispering coin and asks a
question in Thassilonian while the coin is in the air, the coin provides
an answer to the question as it lands, either \'yes\' (the rune) or
\'no\' (the broken column); the word \'yes\' or \'no\' is also whispered
into the user\'s ear as the answer is determined. A whispering coin\'s
knowledge is limited to events that have a significant chance to affect
the coin\'s carrier in the immediate future (no further out than a few
minutes), and is further limited to facts, not conjecture.

You could ask a whispering coin whether a door you were about to open is
trapped, but not \'Is the king the mastermind of the conspiracy we just
learned about?\' The GM, in other words, can determine whether or not a
whispering coin can answer or not. If the coin can\'t answer, it spins
on its edge upon landing for several seconds before flopping over to a
random side and does not whisper a \'yes\' or \'no\' into the user\'s
ear. The coin\'s one use for the day is still consumed.
:::
:::

# Sample Spells

The [Simple Magic Guidelines](#simple-magic-guidelines) used by
Pathfinder FAE allow \"free- casting\" by default, wherein spellcasters
just use the four actions of Fate Accelerated to attack, defend,
overcome, and create advantage with some extended options for create
advantage. Thus, such characters do not need pregenerated \"spell\"
write- ups.

But some players and GM\'s are not comfortable with making things up on
the fly and might prefer having some write-ups to use instead, and
others might benefit from some examples to get a sense of what is
possible and therefore some sample spells are linked to below. However
it is important to note that the material is not intended to be taken as
comprehensive \"spell lists\". The write-ups are just effects that have
been used in play or written up to translate some source material into
Pathfinder Fate Accelerated terms and are provided only as examples of
things that can be done and *not* as definitive \"rules\" or assertions
of how things *must* be done.

:::Tip 
Characters using the [prepared casting] option have a set
list of known spell write-ups vs free-casting and therefore might find
the examples particularly relevant and helpful.
:::

## Sample Arcane Spells

### Buff Spells

Spells that improve or enhance their target.

:::description
###### Arcane Charisma

Arcane Spell (Transmutation), Buff

Create advantage while Carefully Arcane vs an Average (+1) difficulty to
create a spell Aspect on myself called **Arcane Charisma** for one (1)
scene or until all invocations are used. While this Aspect is active I
am more likeable and charming than I normally am. I may invoke this
Aspect to grant myself +1 Flashy for three (3) consecutive exchanges.
:::

:::description
###### Arcane Constitution

Arcane Spell (Transmutation), Buff

Create advantage while Carefully Arcane vs an Average (+1) difficulty to
create a spell Aspect on myself called **Arcane Constitution** for one
(1) scene or until all invocations are used. While this Aspect is active
I am more durable than I normally am. I may invoke this Aspect to absorb
two (2) shifts of damage.
:::

:::description
###### Arcane Speed

Arcane Spell (Transmutation), Buff

Create advantage while Carefully Arcane vs an Average (+1) difficulty to
create a spell Aspect on myself called **Arcane Speed** for one (1)
scene or until all invocations are used. While this Aspect is active I
am quicker than I normally am. I may invoke this Aspect to grant myself
+1 Quick for three (3) consecutive exchanges.
:::

:::description
###### Arcane Intelligence

Arcane Spell (Blessing), Buff

Create advantage while Carefully Arcane vs an Average (+1) difficulty to
create a spell Aspect on myself called **Arcane Intelligence** for one
(1) scene or until all invocations are used. While this Aspect is active
my mind is sharper and I am smarter than I normally am. I may invoke
this Aspect to grant myself +1 Clever for three (3) consecutive
exchanges.
:::

:::description
###### Arcane Speed

Arcane Spell (Transmutation), Buff

Create advantage while Carefully Arcane vs an Average (+1) difficulty to
create a spell Aspect on myself called **Arcane Speed** for one (1)
scene or until all invocations are used. While this Aspect is active I
am faster than I normally am. I may invoke this Aspect to go first in an
exchange or to move an extra zone and still attack, or invoke it twice
to do both at the same time (this is an exception to the general rule
about invoking an Aspect twice for the same action, as it does two
different things when invoked in this way).
:::

:::description
###### Arcane Stealth

Arcane Spell (Transmutation), Buff

Create advantage while Carefully Arcane vs an Average (+1) difficulty to
create a spell Aspect on myself called **Arcane Stealth** for one (1)
scene or until all invocations are used. While this Aspect is active I
am more stealthy than I normally am. I may invoke this Aspect to grant
myself +1 Sneaky for three (3) consecutive exchanges.
:::

:::description
###### Arcane Strength

Arcane Spell (Transmutation), Buff

Create advantage while Carefully Arcane vs an Average (+1) difficulty to
create a spell Aspect on myself called **Arcane Strength** for one (1)
scene or until all invocations are used. While this Aspect is active I
am much stronger than I normally am. I may invoke this Aspect to grant
myself +1 Forceful for three (3) consecutive exchanges.
:::

:::description
###### Arcane Wisdom

Arcane Spell (Transmutation), Buff

Create advantage while Carefully Arcane vs an Average (+1) difficulty to
create a spell Aspect on myself called **Arcane Wisdom** for one (1)
scene or until all invocations are used. While this Aspect is active I
am wiser and more intuitive than I normally am. I may invoke this Aspect
to grant myself +1 Careful for three (3) consecutive exchanges.
:::

:::description
###### Expeditious Movement

Arcane Spell (Transmutation), Buff

Create advantage while Arcane vs an Average (+1) difficulty to create a
spell Aspect on myself called **Expeditious Movement** for one (1) scene
or until all invocations are used. I may invoke this Aspect to move one
additional zone or to gain a +2 bonus to overcome obstacles to my
movement.
:::

:::description
###### Flying

Arcane Spell (Transmutation), Buff

Create advantage while Arcane vs a Fair (+2) difficulty to create a
spell Aspect on myself called **At-Will Flight** for one (1) scene or
until all invocations are used. While this Aspect is active I can fly at
will. While flying I am unaffected by obstacles that I can reasonably
fly over, and I can hover out of easy reach of the ground thus
frustrating melee attackers. Additionally when moving one or more (1+)
zones I may move one (1) additional zone. I may invoke this Aspect to
move one (1) additional zone or to gain a +2 bonus to overcome obstacles
to my movement.
:::

:::description
###### Gigantify

Arcane Spell (Transmutation), Buff

Create advantage while Cleverly Arcane vs an Average (+1) difficulty to
create a spell Aspect on myself or a person within my zone called
**Giant Sized** for one (1) scene or until all invocations have been
used. While this Aspect is active the recipient and their gear grow to
the size of a hill giant, and they become stronger and tougher than they
normally are. The recipient of the Aspect may invoke it to gain a bonus
whenever their size, strength, and durability would benefit them.
:::

:::description
###### Protective Ward

Arcane Spell (Abjuration), Ward

Create advantage while Carefully Arcane vs an Average (+1) difficulty to
apply the spell Aspect **Protective Ward** to myself or someone else in
my zone. While this Aspect is active the person it is attached to can
justify defending against harmful physical and magical abilities.
Additionally, the recipient of the spell Aspect gains +2 when attempting
to overcome mind-affecting effects. This Aspect may also be invoked to
offer further protection when defending from physical or magical
abilities. The Aspect lasts for a scene or until no invokes remain.
:::

:::description
###### Protective Ward (Greater)

Arcane Spell (Abjuration), Ward

Create advantage while Carefully Arcane vs a Great (+4) difficulty to
apply the spell Aspect **Greater Protective Ward** to myself or someone
else in my zone. While this Aspect is active the person it is attached
to can invoke it to justify using my Arcane bonus to defend against
harmful physical and magical abilities. Additionally, the recipient of
the spell Aspect gains +2 when attempting to overcome mind-affecting
effects. The Aspect lasts for a scene or until no invokes remain.
:::

:::description
###### True Strike

Arcane Spell (Divination), Buff

Create advantage while Cleverly Arcane vs an Average (+1) difficulty to
create a spell Aspect on myself called **True Strike** for one (1) scene
or until all invocations are used. I may invoke this Aspect when making
magical or physical attacks to improve my aim.
:::

:::description
###### Water Breathing

Arcane Spell (Transmutation), Buff

Create advantage while Arcane to apply the spell Aspect **Magical Water
Breathing** to myself. I may invoke this Aspect to breathe underwater
for a scene.
:::

### Cold Spells

:::description
###### Cryogenic Cone

Arcane Spell (Evocation), Cold

While Carefully Arcane I suffer a -1 penalty to attack one or more
targets in my zone with a spray of freezing cold air and frost, but if I
split shifts between multiple targets the targets each suffer a -1
penalty to defend against my attack. If I succeed with style and reduce
stress to get a boost the boost is automatically upgraded to the
situational Aspect **Chilled!** with two (2) invokes, which is attached
to the target. This Aspect is automatically invoked at the beginning of
subsequent exchanges to inflict two (2) stress from cold to the target
per invoke. It is a Fair (+2) difficulty to remove this Aspect.
:::

:::description
###### Freezing Missile

Arcane Spell (Evocation), Cold

Basic magical attack actions are explained in the [Simple Magic
Guidelines](#simple-magic-guidelines).
:::

:::description
###### Icewall

Arcane Spell (Universal), Cold

Create Advantage while Carefully Arcane vs a Superb (+5) difficulty to
attach the spell Aspect **Icewall** to a zone up to two zones away to
summon an Icewall construct and cause it to attempt to bar all movement
and block all physical attacks and most magical attacks across it. All
attacks attempted across the wall attack the wall instead. See the
Icewall servitor profile for details.

Servitors are explained in the [Simple Magic
guidelines](#simple-magic-guidelines).

:::description
###### Icewall

**Summoning Difficulty**: - +5

**Aspects**

-   Transparent Magical Wall
-   Cold
-   Immobile

**Good At**:

-   Numbing Cold (+3)
-   Semi-Opaque (+1)

**Limitation**:

-   An immobile wall anchored to its zone that takes no actions

**Hits**:

-   \[1\]\[1\]\[1\]\[1\]\[1\]\[1\]\[1\]

**Stunts**:

-   **Ice Screen**: Reduce all physical damage inflicted against the
    wall by two (2) unless the stress is caused by something involving
    heat or fire.

While it takes no overt actions, the icewall \'attacks\' and creates
advantage against anything touching it via the extreme numbing cold it
emanates. Do not roll to actively defend against physical attacks;
instead just reduce damage as indicated in the write-up.
:::
:::

### Conjuration Spells

:::description
###### Acidic Arrow

Arcane Spell (Conjuration), Acid

While Carefully Arcane I may attack a target within two (2) zones with a
conjured blob of acidic goo. If I get a boost using this attack I may
upgrade it to place the spell Aspect **Acidic Aftermath** to the target,
which is invoked at the beginning of each of the target\'s turns to
inflict one (1) additional shift of stress from acid damage on the
target. This Aspect can be removed by various means by overcoming a
Great (+4) difficulty.
:::

### Control Spells

Spells that attempt to shape a scene, disrupt opponents, impose
temporary detriments, or alter the normal course of events.

:::description
###### Black Tentacles

Arcane Spell (Conjuration)

Create Advantage while Sneakily Arcane vs an Epic (+7) difficulty to
attach the spell Aspect **Black Tentacles!** to a zone up to two zones
away to summon a Black Tentacles construct and cause it to attempt to
entangle all targets in the affected zone and also prevent entangled
targets from leaving the affected zone. See the Black Tentacles servitor
profile for details.
:::

Servitors are explained in the [Simple Magic
Guidelines](#simple-magic-guidelines).

:::description
###### Black Tentacles

**Summoning Difficulty**

-   +7

**Aspects**

-   Magical Tentacles
-   Negative
-   Zone

**Good At**

-   Enervating Entanglement (+6)

**Limitation**:

-   An immobile construct anchored to its zone.

**Stress**:

-   \[1\]\[2\]\[3\]
-   Mild (2)
:::
:::

:::description
###### Black Tentacles (Lesser)

Arcane Spell (Conjuration)

Create Advantage while Sneakily Arcane vs a Great (+4) difficulty to
attach the spell Aspect **Lesser Black Tentacles!** to a person and the
zone that they are in up to two zones away to summon a Black Tentacles
construct and cause it to attempt to entangle the target and prevent
them from leaving their current zone. See the Lesser Black Tentacles
servitor profile for details.

Servitors are explained in the [Simple Magic
Guidelines](#simple-magic-guidelines).

:::description
###### Lesser Black Tentacles

**Summoning Difficulty**

-   +4

**Aspects**

-   Magical Tentacles
-   Negative

**Good At** Enervating Entanglement (+4)

**Limitation**: An immobile construct anchored to its zone.

**Stress**:

-   \[1\]\[2\]\[3\]

-   Mild (2)
:::
:::

:::description
###### Dense Fog

Arcane Spell (Conjuration), Creation, Fog

Create advantage while Arcane vs an Good (+2) difficulty to add the
spell Aspect **Dense Fog** to my zone or an adjacent zone. When I cast
this spell I can choose to spread it to cover additional contiguous
zones at the cost of one (1) Fate point per additional zone. This spell
Aspect provides active Good (+3) defense against notice attempts and
targeted abilites and it takes one additional zone\'s worth of movement
to traverse the affected zone. The spell Aspect lasts for an entire
scene or until it has no invokes remaining.
:::

:::description
###### Hideous Laughter

Arcane Spell (Enchantment), Compulsion, Mind-Affecting

Create advantage while Flashily Arcane vs an Average (+1) difficulty to
create a spell Aspect on a target within my zone or an adjacent zone
called **Hideous Laughter!** for one (1) scene or until all invocations
are used.

While this Aspect is active the victim is afflicted with fits of
uncontrollable laughter, falling prone and becoming unable to attack or
create advantage or move while madly laughing.

Anyone attacking or acting against the target may invoke this Aspect
against the victim to take advantage of their condition.

This spell only affects living, sentient targets.
:::

:::description
###### Obscuring Mist

Arcane Spell (Conjuration), Creation, Fog

Create advantage while Arcane vs a Mediocre (+0) difficulty to add the
spell Aspect **Obscuring Mist** to my zone or an adjacent zone. This
spell Aspect provides active Average (+1) defense against notice
attempts and targeted abilites. The spell Aspect lasts for an entire
scene or until it has no invokes remaining.
:::

:::description
###### Prismatic Spray

Arcane Spell (Illusion), Glamer

Create advantage while Flashily Arcane vs an Average (+1) difficulty to
create a spell Aspect on a target within one zone called **Bedazzled!**
for one (1) scene or until all invocations are used. While the Aspect is
active the target is partially blinded by brightly colored glittery
spots of light that dance before their eyes; the target suffers a -2
penalty on all notice attempts and attacks that rely on sight. Anyone
attacking or acting against the target may invoke this Aspect against
the target to take advantage of their temporary blindness.
:::

:::description
###### Slippery

Arcane Spell (Conjuration), Creation

Create advantage while Cleverly Arcane vs an Average (+1) difficulty to
attach the spell Aspect **Slippery!** to either a zone, a person, or an
object for very different effects. If attached to a zone the Aspect
causes the ground to be very slippery, increasing the likelihood that
people moving on the ground in the affected area will fall down or lose
their balance. If attached to an object it makes the object extremely
difficult to hold on to. If attached to a person it makes the person
difficult to hold on to and also makes it difficult for that person to
hold on to anything else. In all cases the Aspect can be invoked as
appropriate to the narrative given the slippery situation. The Aspect
lasts for one (1) scene or until no invocations remain.
:::

:::description
###### Slow

Arcane Spell (Transmutation), Debuff

Create advantage while Arcane vs an Average (+1) difficulty on a target
that I can detect within two (2) zones. If I am successful I attach the
spell Aspect **Soooooo Sloooooow!** to the target. While this Aspect is
active the target can move one (1) fewer zones per exchange and cannot
move a zone and attack.
:::

### Electricity Spells

:::description
###### Chained Lightning

Arcane Spell (Evocation), Electricity

While Flashily Arcane I may attack one or more targets in my zone or an
adjacent zone. If I split shifts between multiple targets, the targets
each suffer a -1 penalty to defend against my attack.
:::

:::description
###### Shocking Missile

Arcane Spell (Evocation), Electricity

Basic magical attack actions are explained in the [Simple Magic
Guidelines](#simple-magic-guidelines).
:::

### Enchantment Spells

:::description
###### Charm Person

Arcane Spell (Enchantment), Mind-Affecting

Create advantage while Sneakily Arcane vs an Average (+1) difficulty to
create a spell Aspect on myself called **Arcanely Charming** for one (1)
scene or until all invocations are used. While this Aspect is active I
may add my Arcane Archetype to my Roguish Archetype in social
encounters. Also I may invoke this Aspect to grant myself bonuses when
attempting to charm people, such as when creating advantage to make
others want to help or cooperate with me.
:::

:::description
###### Slumber

Arcane Spell (Enchantment), Compulsion, Mind-Affecting, Sleep

Create advantage while Sneakily Arcane vs an Average (+1) difficulty to
put the spell Aspect **Slumber!** on a nameless mook in my zone that
lacks consequences; mobs written up as a single mook are valid targets.
I can affect additional mooks in the same zone as well, but the
difficulty increases by +2 per extra mook I want to affect. The GM may
rule that some mooks are not affected by this spell; for instance things
that are not \'alive\' or that do not need to sleep would generally be
immune. This Aspect lasts for one (1) scene or until out of invocations
and those affected will sleep artificially deeply unless injured.
:::

### Fire Spells

:::description
###### Fiery Missile

Arcane Spell (Evocation), Fire

Basic magical attack actions are explained in the [Simple Magic
Guidelines](#simple-magic-guidelines).
:::

:::description
###### Fireburst

Arcane Spell (Evocation), Fire

While Carefully Arcane I suffer a -1 penalty to attack one or more
targets in my zone, but if I split shifts between multiple targets the
targets each suffer a -1 penalty to defend against my attack. For any
target that I succeed with style against I must reduce the stress
against the target by one (1) to get a boost but the boost is
automatically upgraded to the situational Aspect **On Fire** with two
(2) invokes, which is attached to the target. This Aspect is
automatically invoked at the beginning of subsequent exchanges to
inflict two (2) stress to the target from fire per invoke. It is a Fair
(+2) difficulty to remove this Aspect.
:::

:::description
###### Firewall

Arcane Spell (Evocation), Fire

While Flashily Arcane I may create advantage vs a Fair (+2) difficulty
to attach the spell Aspect **Wall Of Fire!** to three contiguous zones
within two zones of me; the level of effect attained should be noted on
the Aspect. While this Aspect is active it provides active defense to
any target that is targeted across the wall\'s area. Additionally, when
people or large objects pass through the wall it is automatically
invoked to attack them with a bonus equal to the number of shifts
attained when the Aspect was put into play.
:::

### Force Spells

:::description
###### Arcane Bolt

Arcane Spell (Evocation), Force

While Forcefully Arcane I may attack a target within two (2) zones with
a bolt of pure eldritch **force**. I may also attack targets further
away with this spell, taking a -1 shift penalty for each additional two
(2) zones between us. If I succeed with style I cannot reduce the stress
to gain a boost, but if my target defends against this attack with style
they do not get a boost either.
:::

:::description
###### Force Missile

Arcane Spell (Evocation), Force

Basic magical attack actions are explained in the [Simple Magic
Guidelines](#simple-magic-guidelines).
:::

:::description
###### Forcewall

Arcane Spell (Universal), Force

Create Advantage while Forcefully Arcane vs an Epic (+7) difficulty to
attach the spell Aspect **Forcewall** to a zone up to two zones away to
summon a Forcewall construct and cause it to attempt to bar all movement
and block all physical attacks and most magical attacks across it. All
attacks attempted across the wall attack the wall instead. See the
Forcewall servitor profile for details.

Servitors are explained in the [Simple Magic
Guidelines](#simple-magic-guidelines).

:::description
###### Forcewall

**Summoning Difficulty**

-   +7

**Aspects**

-   Transparent Magical Wall
-   Force
-   Immobile

**Limitation**

-   An immobile wall anchored to its zone that takes no actions

**Stress**

-   \[1\]\[2\]\[3\]
-   Mild (2)
-   Moderate (4)
-   Severe (6)

**Stunts**

-   **Force Screen**: Reduce stress caused by all physical damage
    inflicted against the wall by two (2) unless the stress is
    caused by something involving arcane force.

A Forcewall bars passage, even against most magical effects and is even
effective against incorporeal things; however it does not bar
teleportation. All attacks made \'through\' the Forcewall are blocked by
and applied to the Forcewall. Do not roll to actively defend against
physical attacks; instead just reduce damage as indicated in the
write-up.
:::
:::

:::description
###### Mage Armor

Arcane Spell (Conjuration), Force

Create advantage while Carefully Arcane vs an Average (+1) difficulty to
apply the spell Aspect **Mage Armor** to myself. While this Aspect is
active I can justify using Arcane to defend against physical attacks.
This Aspect may also be invoked to offer protection when defending from
physical or magical harm.
:::

:::description
###### Shield

Arcane Spell (Abjuration), Force

Create advantage while Carefully Arcane vs an Average (+1) difficulty to
apply the spell Aspect **Magic Shield** to myself. While this Aspect is
active I reduce damage from physical and magical attacks by one (1).
This Aspect may also be invoked to offer protection when defending from
physical or magical harm.
:::

### Illusion Spells

:::description
###### Blur

Arcane Spell (Illusion), Glamer

Create advantage while Cleverly Arcane vs an Average (+1) difficulty to
attach the spell Aspect **I\'m So Blurry** to myself. While this Aspect
is active it is difficult for opponents to see or target me clearly, and
all attempts to notice me via sight or directly affect me suffer a -2
penalty; this does not work against area affecting abilities. I may
invoke this Aspect to gain a bonus on actions where my blurriness and
indistinct outline benefit me, such as to defend against attacks or to
avoid being recognized.
:::

:::description
###### Disguise

Arcane Spell (Illusion)

Create advantage while Sneakily Arcane vs an Average (+1) difficulty to
create a spell Aspect on myself called **Magical Disguise** for one (1)
scene or until all invocations are used. While it is active this Aspect
allows me to look like someone else. Attempts to imitate a specific
individual are more likely to be disbelieved unless a convincing
portrayal is given. I may invoke the Aspect to gain a bonus on an action
where looking like someone else helps me succeed, such as attacking an
unaware opponent. The spell Aspect can be temporarily neutralized by
those with unusual senses or magic or special items creating an
applicable advantage; the ability or item will generally specify how it
works or what the difficulty is. The spell Aspect can also be overcome
and thus removed by some abilities that explicitly counter illusions or
dispel magic in which case the difficulty is determined as normal per
the Simple Magic Guidelines.
:::

:::description
###### Invisibility

Arcane Spell (Illusion), Invisibility

Create advantage while Sneakily Arcane vs an Average (+1) difficulty to
create a spell Aspect on myself called **Invisible** for one (1) scene
or until all invocations are used. While the Aspect is in play, I cannot
be seen by normal senses. I may invoke the Aspect to gain a bonus on an
action where being invisible helps me succeed, such as attacking an
unaware opponent. The spell Aspect can be temporarily neutralized by
those with unusual senses or magic or special items creating an
applicable advantage; the ability or item will generally specify how it
works or what the difficulty is. The spell Aspect can also be overcome
and thus removed by some abilities that explicitly counter invisibility
or dispel magic in which case the difficulty is determined as normal per
the Simple Magic Guidelines.
:::

:::description
###### Mirror Images

Arcane Spell (Illusion), Figment

Create Advantage while Sneakily Arcane vs an Average (+1) difficulty to
attach the spell Aspect **Mirror Images** to myself to create one Mirror
Image construct which is an illusory duplicate of myself that stays near
me doing its best to confuse others as to which of us is real. I can
create additional Mirror Image constructs by allocating one (1) extra
shift for each. See the Mirror Images servitor profile for details.

Servitors are explained in the [Simple Magic
Guidelines](#simple-magic-guidelines).

:::description
###### Mirror Image

**Summoning Difficulty**

-   +1

**Aspects**

-   Just An Illusionary Duplicate
-   Glamour
-   Obedient

**Good At**

-   Looking Like Caster (+3)
-   Distracting (+1)

**Bad At**:

-   Mirror Images do not actually exist and can\'t do anything other
    than confuse and distract attackers.

**Hits**:

-   \[1\]
:::
:::

:::description
###### Visual Image

Arcane Spell (Illusion), Figment

Create advantage while Sneakily Arcane vs an Average (+1) difficulty to
create a spell Aspect called **Visual Image** on a zone within one (1)
zone of me. The Aspect lasts for one (1) scene or until all invocations
are used. While active this Aspect allows me to project a specific
visual-only illusion within the target zone; which is to say that the
illusion cannot make noise, does not have a scent, and so forth. The
nature of the illusion is limited only by my imagination, but the less
believable the illusion the more likely observers will not be fooled by
it.
:::

### Summoning Spells

:::description
###### Monster Summoning

Arcane Spell (Abjuration)

Summoning magic is handled using the servitor guidelines.

Servitors are explained in the [Simple Magic
Guidelines](#simple-magic-guidelines).
:::

:::description
###### Murder of Crows

Arcane Spell (Conjuration), Summoning

Create Advantage while Carefully Arcane vs a Good (+3) difficulty to
attach the spell Aspect **Murder of Crows!** to a target up to two zones
away to summon a mob of angry crows and cause them to attack and harry
the target. See the Murder of Crows servitor profile for details.

Servitors are explained in the [Simple Magic
Guidelines](#simple-magic-guidelines).

:::description
###### Murder Of Crows

**Summoning Difficulty**

-   +4

**Aspects**

-   Caw Caw Caw
-   Murder On The Wing
-   Obedient

**Good At**

-   Pecking (+2)
-   Distracting (+1)

**Bad At**

-   No Thumbs (-2)

**Hits**:

-   \[1\]\[1\]\[1\]\[1\]
:::
:::

### Teleportation Spells

:::description
###### Dimension Door

Arcane Spell (Universal), Teleportation

Overcome while Cleverly Arcane to immediately teleport myself a short
distance by overcoming a difficulty equal to the number of zones away
the target is, +1. Thus to dimension door up to three (3) zones away
would require me to overcome a Great (+4) difficulty, while five (5)
zones would require me to overcome a Fantastic (+6) difficulty. When
using this ability, I can not move a zone in the normal way, and if I
fail the spell I go nowhere at all.
:::

:::description
###### Translocation

Arcane Spell (Universal), Teleportation

Overcome while Cleverly Arcane to immediately teleport myself out of the
scene by overcoming a Fantastic (+6) difficulty. My range is limited to
somewhere within approximately fifty (50) miles of my current location.
When using this ability I can not move a zone in the normal way, and if
I fail the spell I go nowhere at all. I cannot cast this spell while
engaged in a conflict. I can use extra shifts on a one to one basis to
carry willing travelers who share my zone with me when I teleport.
:::

:::description
###### Greater Translocation

Arcane Spell (Universal), Teleportation

Overcome while Cleverly Arcane to immediately teleport myself out of the
scene by overcoming a Legendary (+8) difficulty. My range is limited to
somewhere within approximately five hundred (500) miles of my current
location. When using this ability I can not move a zone in the normal
way, and if I fail the spell I go nowhere at all. I cannot cast this
spell while engaged in a conflict. I can use extra shifts on a one to
one basis to carry willing travelers who share my zone with me when I
teleport.
:::

### Transmutation Spells

:::description
###### Disintegration

Arcane Spell (Transmutation), Destruction

While Quickly Arcane I gain +4 to attack a target within two (2) zones
with **disintegrating** magics that literally eradicates the existence
of my target. If I take the target out, they are completely destroyed.
However if the target is not taken out, this attack has no effect at
all.
:::

### Utility Spells

:::description
###### Alarum

Arcane Spell (Divination, Illusion), Glamer

Create advantage while Carefully Arcane vs an Average (+1) difficulty to
create a spell Aspect on a target zone called **Alarum** for 1 scene or
until all invocations are used. When I do this, I note a list of people
who will not set off the alarm and I also decide if the alarm will be
audible and how loud or if it will instead just mentally alert me. While
the Aspect is active any person or thing other than those I listed as
exceptions causes a magical alarm to go off. The Aspect can be detected
with mystical senses, and can be overcome by appropriate magic; the
difficulty to do either is determined as normal per the simple magic
guidelines.
:::

:::description
###### Detect Magic

Arcane Spell (Divination)

Create advantage while Cleverly Arcane vs a Mediocre (+0) difficulty to
add the spell Aspect **Detect Magic** to myself. While this Aspect is
active I can justify using my Arcane capability to notice things that
require mystical senses to perceive. I can also invoke the Aspect for a
bonus to do so as necessary. This Aspect lasts for a scene or until no
invocations remain.
:::

:::description
###### Detect Secret Doors

Arcane Spell (Divination)

I can use overcome while being Cleverly Arcane to notice hidden doors
(and similar difficulties) in my zone.
:::

:::description
###### Dispel Magic

Arcane Spell (Abjuration), Dispel

Dispelling magic is handled using the overcome action.
:::

:::description
###### Glimmerdust

Arcane Spell (Conjuration), Creation, Zone

Create advantage while Flashily Arcane vs an Average (+1) difficulty to
conjure a dust or powder like substance that immediately catalyzes with
a glimmering sparkle that coats everything in the zone and disrupts most
invisibility and stealth related effects in my zone or an adjacent zone.
I take a -1 penalty on my roll, but I add the spell Aspect
**Glimmerdusted** to anyone in the affected zone that has an
Invisibility related (or similar effect) Aspect active. While someone
has one of these spell Aspects active on them their Invisibility Aspect
is suppressed; each exchange each of these Aspects is automatically
invoked to continue suppressing relevant Invisibility effects. Each
spell Aspect lasts until there are no invokes remaining.
:::

## Divine Spells

### Blessing Spells

:::description
###### Divine Charisma

Divine Spell (Blessing), Buff

Create advantage while Carefully Divine vs an Average (+1) difficulty to
create a spell Aspect on myself called **Divine Charisma** for one (1)
scene or until all invocations are used. While this Aspect is active I
am more likeable and charming than I normally am. I may invoke this
Aspect to grant myself +1 Flashy for three (3) consecutive exchanges.
:::

:::description
###### Divine Constitution

Divine Spell (Blessing), Buff

Create advantage while Carefully Divine vs an Average (+1) difficulty to
create a spell Aspect on myself called **Divine Constitution** for one
(1) scene or until all invocations are used. While this Aspect is active
I am more durable than I normally am. I may invoke this Aspect to absorb
two (2) shifts of damage.
:::

:::description
###### Divine Intelligence

Divine Spell (Blessing), Buff

Create advantage while Carefully Divine vs an Average (+1) difficulty to
create a spell Aspect on myself called **Divine Intelligence** for one
(1) scene or until all invocations are used. While this Aspect is active
my mind is sharper and I am smarter than I normally am. I may invoke
this Aspect to grant myself +1 Clever for three (3) consecutive
exchanges.
:::

:::description
###### Divine Strength

Divine Spell (Blessing), Buff

Create advantage while Carefully Divine vs an Average (+1) difficulty to
create a spell Aspect on myself called **Divine Strength** for one (1)
scene or until all invocations are used. While this Aspect is active I
am much stronger than I normally am. I may invoke this Aspect to grant
myself +1 Forceful for three (3) consecutive exchanges.
:::

:::description
###### Divine Wisdom

Divine Spell (Blessing), Buff

Create advantage while Carefully Divine vs an Average (+1) difficulty to
create a spell Aspect on myself called **Divine Wisdom** for one (1)
scene or until all invocations are used. While this Aspect is active I
am wiser and more intuitive than I normally am. I may invoke this Aspect
to grant myself +1 Careful for three (3) consecutive exchanges.
:::

### Healing Spells

:::description
###### Greater Restoration

Divine Spell (Healing)

Overcome while Carefully Divine vs a Legendary (+8) difficulty to remove
all debilitating situational Aspects currently affecting the target\'s
health or normal functioning that have a difficulty to remove of Epic
(+7) or less. This does not work on environmental Aspects, scene
Aspects, or other situational Aspects that affect the target externally,
it only works against situational Aspects that affect them directly and
personally such as poison, fatigue, curses, and so forth.
:::

:::description
###### Heal

Divine Spell (Healing)

While Carefully Divine attempt to clear a specific stress box or
Consequence by overcoming a difficulty equal to the numerical value of
the stress box or Consequence.
:::

:::description
###### Lesser Restoration

Divine Spell (Healing)

Overcome while Carefully Divine vs a Great (+4) difficulty to remove all
debilitating situational Aspects currently affecting the target\'s
health or normal functioning that have a difficulty to remove of Good
(+3) or less. This does not work on environmental Aspects, scene
Aspects, or other situational Aspects that affect the target externally,
it only works against situational Aspects that affect them directly and
personally such as poison, fatigue, curses, and so forth.
:::

:::description
###### Restoration

Divine Spell (Healing)

Overcome while Carefully Divine vs a Fantastic (+6) difficulty to remove
all debilitating situational Aspects currently affecting the target\'s
health or normal functioning that have a difficulty to remove of Superb
(+5) or less. This does not work on environmental Aspects, scene
Aspects, or other situational Aspects that affect the target externally,
it only works against situational Aspects that affect them directly and
personally such as poison, fatigue, curses, and so forth.
:::

### Knowledge Spells

:::description
###### Detect Magic

Divine Spell (Knowledge, Magic)

Create advantage while Carefully Divine vs a Medicore (+0) difficulty to
add the spell Aspect **Detect Magic** to myself. While this Aspect is
active I can justify using my Divine capability to notice things that
require mystical senses to perceive. I can also invoke the Aspect for a
bonus to do so as necessary. This Aspect lasts for a scene or until no
invocations remain.
:::

:::description
###### True Seeing

Divine Spell (Knowledge)

Create advantage while Cleverly Divine vs a Good (+3) difficulty to
create a spell Aspect on myself called **True Seeing** for one (1) scene
or until all invocations are used. While this Aspect is active I may
perceive things that require mystical senses to perceive and I may use
Divine instead of Focused to notice things. I may also use my Divine
capability to defend against mind-affecting effects and illusions, and
to perceive that which is invisible. I may also invoke this Aspect to
gain a bonus when attempting any of these things.
:::

### Light Spells

:::description
###### Purifying Light

Divine Spell (Light), Positive

While Flashily Divine I may attack a target within two (2) zones with a
ray of blindingly bright and searingly hot **positive energy**. If I
succeed with style I must reduce the stress by one (1) shift to gain a
boost but the boost is upgraded to the situational Aspect **Blinded By
The Light!** with two (2) invokes. While this Aspect is active the
target cannot notice things via vision. The Aspect can be invoked by
anyone to hinder the target as appropriate. The Aspect can be overcome
by healing magics or the use of unusual senses with a difficulty
determined by the GM.
:::

### Necromantic Spells

:::description
###### Speak With Dead

Divine Spell (Necromantic)

Overcome while Carefully Divine vs a Fair (+2) difficulty to get the
answer to one or more (1+) basic questions from a corpse; success grants
one (1) question and each extra shift grants one (1) additional
question. Some stipulations and restrictions apply.
:::

You grant the semblance of life and intellect to a corpse, allowing it
to answer several questions that you put to it. The corpse\'s knowledge
is limited to what the creature knew during life, including the
languages it spoke (if any). Answers are usually brief, cryptic, or
repetitive. If the corpse was inimical to you in life, the answers may
be grudging or incomplete but not untrue.

If the corpse has been subject to speak with dead within the past week,
the new spell fails. You can cast this spell on a corpse that has been
deceased for any amount of time, but the body must be mostly intact to
be able to respond. A damaged corpse may be able to give partial answers
or partially correct answers, but it must at least have a mouth in order
to speak at all.

This spell does not let you actually speak to the person (whose soul has
departed). It instead draws on the imprinted knowledge stored in the
corpse. The partially animated body retains the imprint of the soul that
once inhabited it, and thus it can speak with all the knowledge that the
creature had while alive. The corpse, however, cannot learn new
information. Indeed, it can\'t even remember being questioned.

This spell does not affect a corpse that has been turned into an undead
creature.

Basic magical overcome actions are explained in the [Simple Magic
Guidelines](#simple-magic-guidelines).
:::

### Protective Spells

:::description
###### Protection From Harm

Divine Spell (Protective)

Create advantage while Carefully Divine vs an Average (+1) difficulty to
apply the spell Aspect **Protection From Harm** to myself or someone
else in my zone. While this Aspect is active the person it is attached
to can justify defending against all abilities that would cause physical
or magical harm used by those with an outlook or innate nature that is
at odds with my faith and my diety\'s purview. Additionally, the
recipient of the spell Aspect gains +2 when attempting to overcome
mind-affecting effects. This Aspect may also be invoked to offer further
protection when defending from physical or magical harm. The Aspect
lasts for a scene or until no invokes remain.
:::

:::description
###### Protection From Harm (Greater)

Divine Spell (Protective)

Create advantage while Carefully Divine vs an Great (+4) difficulty to
apply the spell Aspect **Greater Protection From Harm** to myself or
someone else in my zone. While this Aspect is active the person it is
attached to can justify using my Divine bonus to defend against all
abilities that would cause physical or magical harm used by those with
an outlook or innate nature that is at odds with my faith and my
diety\'s purview. Additionally, the recipient of the spell Aspect gains
+2 when attempting to overcome mind-affecting effects. This Aspect may
also be invoked to offer further protection when defending from physical
or magical harm. The Aspect lasts for a scene or until no invokes
remain.
:::

## Primal Spells

### Animal Spells

:::description
###### Animal Friendship

Primal Spell (Animal), Mind-Affecting

Create advantage while Sneakily Primal vs a Mediocre (+0) difficulty to
create a spell Aspect on myself called **Animal Friendship** for one (1)
scene or until all invocations are used. While this Aspect is active I
may justify using Primal to have social encounters with animals as if I
share a language with them, and under most circumstances animals are
generally friendly to me. I may also invoke this Aspect to grant myself
bonuses when attempting to charm animals, such as when creating
advantage to make animals want to help or cooperate with me.
:::

:::description
###### Animal Summoning

Primal Spell (Animal)

Summoning magic is handled using the servitor guidelines.

Servitors are explained in the [Simple Magic
Guidelines](#simple-magic-guidelines).
:::

:::description
###### Breath Of The Fish

Primal Spell (Animal), Buff

Create advantage while Arcane vs a Fair (+2) difficulty to apply the
spell Aspect **Breath Of The Fish** to myself or an ally in my zone. The
recipient may invoke this Aspect to breathe underwater for a scene.
:::

:::description
###### Cleverness Of The Monkey

Primal Spell (Animal), Buff

Create advantage while Carefully Primal vs a Fair (+2) difficulty to
create a spell Aspect on myself or an ally in my zone called
**Cleverness Of The Monkey** for one (1) scene or until all invocations
are used. While this Aspect is active the recipient may invoke this
Aspect to grant themselves +1 Clever for three (3) consecutive
exchanges.
:::

:::description
###### Hide Of The Rhino

Primal Spell (Animal), Buff

Create advantage while Carefully Primal vs a Fair (+2) difficulty to
create a spell Aspect on myself or an ally in my zone called **Hide Of
The Rhino** for one (1) scene or until all invocations are used. While
this Aspect is active the recipient may invoke this Aspect to absorb two
(2) shifts of damage.
:::

:::description
###### Murder of Crows

Primal Spell (Animal), Summoning

Create Advantage while Carefully Primal vs a Good (+3) difficulty to
attach the spell Aspect **Murder of Crows!** to a target up to two zones
away to summon a mob of angry crows and cause them to attack and harry
the target. See the Murder of Crows servitor profile for details.

Servitors are explained in the [Simple Magic
Guidelines](#simple-magic-guidelines).

:::description
###### Murder Of Crows

**Summoning Difficulty**

-   +4

**Aspects**

-   Caw Caw Caw
-   Murder On The Wing
-   Obedient

**Good At**

-   Pecking (+2)
-   Distracting (+1)

**Bad At**

-   No Thumbs (-2)

**Hits**:

-   \[1\]\[1\]\[1\]\[1\]
:::
:::

:::description
###### Patience Of The Owl

Primal Spell (Animal), Buff

Create advantage while Carefully Primal vs a Fair (+2) difficulty to
create a spell Aspect on myself or an ally in my zone called **Patience
Of The Owl** for one (1) scene or until all invocations are used. While
this Aspect is active the recipient may invoke this Aspect to grant
themselves +1 Careful for three (3) consecutive exchanges.
:::

:::description
###### Quickness Of The Hummingbird

Primal Spell (Animal), Buff

Create advantage while Carefully Primal vs a Fair (+2) difficulty to
create a spell Aspect on myself or an ally in my zone called **Quickness
Of The Hummingbird** for one (1) scene or until all invocations are
used. While this Aspect is active the recipient may invoke this Aspect
to grant themselves +1 Quick for three (3) consecutive exchanges.
:::

:::description
###### Speed Of The Cheetah

Primal Spell (Animal), Buff

Create advantage while Carefully Primal vs a Fair (+2) difficulty to
create a spell Aspect on myself or an ally in my zone called **Speed Of
The Cheetah** for one (1) scene or until all invocations are used. While
this Aspect is active the recipient may invoke this Aspect to go first
in an exchange or to move an extra zone and still attack, or invoke it
twice to do both at the same time (this is an exception to the general
rule about invoking an Aspect twice for the same action, as it does two
different things when invoked in this way).
:::

:::description
###### Stature Of The Bear

Primal Spell (Animal), Buff

Create advantage while Carefully Primal vs a Mediocre (+0) difficulty to
create a spell Aspect on myself or an ally within my zone called
**Stature Of The Bear** for one (1) scene or until all invocations have
been used. While this Aspect is active the recipient and their gear grow
to the size of a large bear, and they become stronger and tougher than
they normally are. The recipient of the Aspect may invoke it to gain a
bonus whenever their size, strength, and durability would benefit them.
:::

:::description
###### Stealth Of The Panther

Primal Spell (Animal), Buff

Create advantage while Carefully Primal vs a Fair (+2) difficulty to
create a spell Aspect on myself or an ally in my zone called **Stealth
Of The Panther** for one (1) scene or until all invocations are used.
While this Aspect is active I am more stealthy than I normally am. I may
invoke this Aspect to grant myself +1 Sneaky for three (3) consecutive
exchanges.
:::

:::description
###### Strength Of The Ape

Primal Spell (Animal), Buff

Create advantage while Carefully Primal vs a Fair (+2) difficulty to
create a spell Aspect on myself or an ally in my zone called **Strength
Of The Ape** for one (1) scene or until all invocations are used. While
this Aspect is active the recipient may invoke this Aspect to grant
themselves +1 Forceful for three (3) consecutive exchanges.
:::

:::description
###### Winged Flight

Primal Spell (Animal), Animal Shape, Buff

Create advantage while Primal vs a Good (+3) difficulty to create a
spell Aspect on myself or an ally in my zone called **Winged Flight**
for one (1) scene or until all invocations are used. When this Aspect is
created the recipient sprouts magnificent wings and while the Aspect is
active the recipient can use these wings to fly. While flying the
recipient is unaffected by obstacles that they can reasonably fly over,
and they can hover out of easy reach of the ground thus frustrating
melee attackers. Additionally when moving one or more (1+) zones the
recipient may move one (1) additional zone. The recipient may invoke
this Aspect to move one (1) additional zone or to gain a +2 bonus to
overcome obstacles to their movement.
:::

### Elemental Spells

:::description
###### Conflagration

Primal Spell (Elemental), Fire

While Carefully Primal I may attack one or more targets in an adjacent
zone and if I split shifts between multiple targets the targets each
suffer a -1 penalty to defend against my attack. For any target that I
succeed with style against I must reduce the stress against the target
by one (1) to get a boost but the boost is automatically upgraded to the
situational Aspect **On Fire** with two (2) invokes, which is attached
to the target. This Aspect is automatically invoked at the beginning of
subsequent exchanges to inflict two (2) stress to the target from fire
per invoke. It is a Fair (+2) difficulty to remove this Aspect. I cannot
move the same exchange that I cast this spell.
:::

:::description
###### Elemental Summoning

Primal Spell (Elemental)

Summoning magic is handled using the servitor guidelines.

Servitors are explained in the [Simple Magic
Guidelines](#simple-magic-guidelines).
:::

:::description
###### Freezing Gust

Primal Spell (Weather), Cold, Air

Basic magical attack actions are explained in the [Simple Magic
Guidelines](#simple-magic-guidelines).
:::

:::description
###### Ignite

Primal Spell (Elemental), Fire

Basic magical attack actions are explained in the [Simple Magic
Guidelines](#simple-magic-guidelines).
:::

:::description
###### Produce Flame

Primal Spell (Elemental), Fire

While Flashily Primal I may attack a target within three (3) zones with
a burst of flaming fire. If I succeed with style I must reduce the
stress by one (1) shift to gain a boost but the boost is upgraded to the
situational Aspect **On Fire!** with two (2) invokes, which is attached
to the target. This Aspect is automatically invoked at the beginning of
subsequent exchanges to inflict two (2) stress to the target per invoke.
It is a Fair (+2) difficulty to remove this Aspect.
:::

### Fey Spells

:::description
###### Faerie Charm

Primal Spell (Fey), Mind-Affecting

Create advantage while Sneakily Primal vs a Mediocre (+0) difficulty to
create a spell Aspect on myself called **Faerie Charm** for one (1)
scene or until all invocations are used. While this Aspect is active I
may use Primal instead of Roguish in social encounters. I may also
invoke this Aspect to grant myself bonuses when attempting to charm
people, such as when creating advantage to make others want to help or
cooperate with me.
:::

:::description
###### Faerie Cloak

Primal Spell (Fey), Invisibility

Create advantage while Sneakily Primal vs an Average (+1) difficulty to
create a spell Aspect on myself called **Faerie Cloak** for one (1)
scene or until all invocations are used. While the Aspect is in play, I
cannot be seen by normal senses. I may invoke the Aspect to gain a bonus
on an action where being invisible helps me succeed, such as attacking
an unaware opponent. The spell Aspect can be temporarily neutralized by
those with unusual senses or magic or special items creating an
applicable advantage; the ability or item will generally specify how it
works or what the difficulty is. The spell Aspect can also be overcome
and thus removed by some abilities that explicitly counter invisibility
or dispel magic in which case the difficulty is determined as normal per
the Simple Magic Guidelines.
:::

:::description
###### Faerie Glamour

Primal Spell (Fey), Illusion, Figment

Create advantage while Sneakily Primal vs an Average (+1) difficulty to
create a spell Aspect called **Faerie Glamour** on a zone within one (1)
zone of me. The Aspect lasts for one (1) scene or until all invocations
are used. While active this Aspect allows me to project a specific
visual-only illusion within the target zone; which is to say that the
illusion cannot make noise, does not have a scent, and so forth. The
nature of the illusion is limited only by my imagination, but the less
believable the illusion the more likely observers will not be fooled by
it.
:::

:::description
###### Fey Summoning

Primal Spell (Fey)

Summoning magic is handled using the servitor guidelines.

Servitors are explained in the [Simple Magic
Guidelines](#simple-magic-guidelines).
:::

:::description
###### Fey Visage

Primal Spell (Fey), Illusion

Create advantage while Sneakily Primal vs an Average (+1) difficulty to
create a spell Aspect on myself called **Fey Visage** for one (1) scene
or until all invocations are used. While it is active this Aspect allows
me to look like someone else. Attempts to imitate a specific individual
are more likely to be disbelieved unless a convincing portrayal is
given. I may invoke the Aspect to gain a bonus on an action where
looking like someone else helps me succeed, such as attacking an unaware
opponent. The spell Aspect can be temporarily neutralized by those with
unusual senses or magic or special items creating an applicable
advantage; the ability or item will generally specify how it works or
what the difficulty is. The spell Aspect can also be overcome and thus
removed by some abilities that explicitly counter illusions or dispel
magic in which case the difficulty is determined as normal per the
Simple Magic Guidelines.
:::

:::description
###### Nix Magic

Primal Spell (Fey), Dispel

This spell allows the caster to dispel a magical effect. Dispelling
magic is handled using the overcome action.
:::

### Plant Spells

:::description
###### Barkskin

Primal Spell (Plant)

Create advantage while Carefully Primal vs an Average (+1) difficulty to
apply the spell Aspect **Barkskin** to myself or an ally in my zone.
While this Aspect is active the recipient gains +2 when defending
against physical or damaging magical attacks. This Aspect may also be
invoked to offer additional protection when defending from physical or
magical harm.
:::

:::description
###### Entangling Undergrowth

Primal Spell (Plant)

Create Advantage while Carefully Primal in a rural area with appropriate
vegetation vs a Good (+3) difficulty to cause the undergrowth in my zone
or an adjacent zone to animate and wrap itself around and attempt to
entangle all targets in the zone. See the Entangling Undergrowth
servitor profile for details.

Servitors are explained in the [Simple Magic
Guidelines](#simple-magic-guidelines).

The difficulty to cast this spell has been lowered from Fantastic (+6)
due to the appropriate area with applicable vegetation restriction.

:::description
###### Entangling Undergrowth

**Summoning Difficulty**

-   +3

**Aspects**

-   Animated Undergrowth
-   Zone
-   Obedient

**Good At**

-   Entangling (+4)

**Limitation**:

-   An immobile construct anchored to its zone.

**Hits**:

-   \[1\]\[1\]\[1\]\[1\]\[1\]
:::
:::

:::description
###### Ironwood Shield

Primal Spell (Plant)

Create advantage while Carefully Primal vs an Average (+1) difficulty to
apply the spell Aspect **Ironwood Shield** to myself or an ally in my
zone. To do this I need access to a piece of wood at least as large as
my hand, which I can cause to magically change into a large but
extremely light and sturdy shield. While this Aspect is active the
recipient of the Aspect may reduce damage from physical and magical
attacks by one (1). This Aspect may also be invoked to offer protection
when defending from physical or magical harm.
:::

:::description
###### Tree Shape

Primal Spell (Plant)

Create advantage while Quickly Primal vs a Fair (+2) difficulty to apply
the spell Aspect **Tree Shape** on myself. While this Aspect is in play,
I am able to assume the form of a large living tree or shrub or a large
dead tree trunk. To all normal senses I appear to be nothing more than a
tree or shrub. Mystical senses or spells that detect magic or enhance
perception might be able to penetrate my magic; overcoming a Fantastic
(+6) difficulty allows a such an observer notice a faint but
indeterminant magical aura around me, and overcoming an Astonishing (+9)
difficulty reveals my true form. While in tree form, I can observe all
that transpires around me just as if I were in my normal form. All
clothing and gear carried or worn changes with me. I can return to my
normal form as a non action.
:::

### Seer Spells

:::description
###### Hunters Eye

Primal Spell (Seer), Buff

Create advantage while Carefully Primal vs an Average (+1) difficulty to
create a spell Aspect on myself called **Hunters Eye** for one (1) scene
or until all invocations are used. I may invoke this Aspect when making
magical or physical attacks to improve my aim.
:::

:::description
###### Sense Magic

Primal Spell (Seer)

Create advantage while Carefully Primal vs a Mediocre (+0) difficulty to
add the spell Aspect **Sense Magic** to myself. While this Aspect is
active I can justify using my Primal capability to notice things that
require mystical senses to perceive. I can also invoke the Aspect for a
bonus to do so as necessary. This Aspect lasts for a scene or until no
invocations remain.
:::

### Spirit Spells

:::description
###### Commune With Spirit

Primal Spell (Spirit)

Overcome while Carefully Primal vs a Great (+4) difficulty to get the
answer to one or more (1+) basic questions from a spirit; success grants
one (1) question and each extra shift grants one (1) additional
question. Some stipulations and restrictions apply.

You commune with a spirit, allowing it to answer one or more questions
that you put to it. The spirit\'s knowledge is and whether the spirit
you are communing with can answer a given question are subject to the
GM\'s discretion. You are not limited by language, but answers are
usually brief, cryptic, or repetitive.

If the spirit is hostile or inimical to you it may attempt to defend
against your overcome action, at the GM\'s discretion.

You can cast this spell on a spirit that has been deceased for any
amount of time, but the spirit must be within your vicinity when you
cast the spell. The difficulty increases by one (1) each time you cast
this spell within the same session.

Basic magical overcome actions are explained in the [Simple Magic
Guidelines](#simple-magic-guidelines).
:::

:::description
###### Spirit Summoning

Primal Spell (Spirit)

Summoning magic is handled using the servitor guidelines.

Servitors are explained in the [Simple Magic
Guidelines](#simple-magic-guidelines).
:::

### Vitality Spells

:::description
###### Greater Restoration

Primal Spell (Vitality), Healing

Overcome while Carefully Primal vs a Astonishing (+9) difficulty to
remove all debilitating situational Aspects currently affecting the
target\'s health or normal functioning that have a difficulty to remove
of Epic (+7) or less. This does not work on environmental Aspects, scene
Aspects, or other situational Aspects that affect the target externally,
it only works against situational Aspects that affect them directly and
personally such as poison, fatigue, curses, and so forth.
:::

:::description
###### Heal

Primal Spell (Vitality), Healing

While Carefully Primal attempt to clear a specific stress box or
Consequence by overcoming a difficulty equal to the numerical value of
the stress box or Consequence. I may not move in the same exchange that
I take this action.
:::

:::description
###### Lesser Restoration

Primal Spell (Vitality), Healing

Overcome while Carefully Primal vs a Superb (+5) difficulty to remove
all debilitating situational Aspects currently affecting the target\'s
health or normal functioning that have a difficulty to remove of Good
(+3) or less. This does not work on environmental Aspects, scene
Aspects, or other situational Aspects that affect the target externally,
it only works against situational Aspects that affect them directly and
personally such as poison, fatigue, curses, and so forth.
:::

:::description
###### Primal Ward

Primal Spell (Vitality), Ward

Create advantage while Carefully Primal vs an Average (+1) difficulty to
apply the spell Aspect **Primal Ward** to myself or someone else in my
zone. While this Aspect is active the person it is attached to gains +1
while defending against harmful physical and magical abilities. This
Aspect may also be invoked to offer further protection when defending
from physical or magical abilities. The Aspect lasts for a scene or
until no invokes remain.
:::

:::description
###### Primal Ward (Greater)

Primal Spell (Vitality), Ward

Create advantage while Carefully Primal vs a Good (+3) difficulty to
apply the spell Aspect **Greater Primal Ward** to myself or someone else
in my zone. While this Aspect is active the person it is attached to
gains +2 while defending against harmful physical and magical abilities.
The Aspect lasts for a scene or until no invokes remain.
:::

:::description
###### Restoration

Primal Spell (Vitality), Healing

Overcome while Carefully Primal vs a Epic (+7) difficulty to remove all
debilitating situational Aspects currently affecting the target\'s
health or normal functioning that have a difficulty to remove of Superb
(+5) or less. This does not work on environmental Aspects, scene
Aspects, or other situational Aspects that affect the target externally,
it only works against situational Aspects that affect them directly and
personally such as poison, fatigue, curses, and so forth.
:::

:::description
###### Slumber

Primal Spell (Vitality), Compulsion, Mind-Affecting, Sleep

Create advantage while Sneakily Primal vs an Average (+1) difficulty to
put the spell Aspect **Slumber!** on a nameless mook in my zone that
lacks consequences; mobs written up as a single mook are valid targets.
I can affect additional mooks in the same zone as well, but the
difficulty increases by +2 per extra mook I want to affect. The GM may
rule that some mooks are not affected by this spell; for instance things
that are not \'alive\' or that do not need to sleep would generally be
immune. This Aspect lasts for one (1) scene or until out of invocations
and those affected will sleep artificially deeply unless injured.
:::

### Weather Spells

:::description
###### Call Lightning

Primal Spell (Weather), Electricity

While Carefully Primal and outside under the open sky I may attack all
targets in an adjacent zone and if I split shifts between multiple
targets the targets each suffer a -2 penalty to defend against my
attack. I cannot move in the same exchange that I cast this spell.
:::

:::description
###### Dense Fog

Primal Spell (Weather), Creation, Fog

Create advantage while Primal vs an Good (+2) difficulty to add the
spell Aspect **Dense Fog** to my zone or an adjacent zone. When I cast
this spell I can choose to spread it to cover additional contiguous
zones at the cost of one (1) Fate point per additional zone. This spell
Aspect provides active Good (+3) defense against notice attempts and
targeted abilites and it takes one additional zone\'s worth of movement
to traverse the affected zone. The spell Aspect lasts for an entire
scene or until it has no invokes remaining.
:::

:::description
###### Lightning Arc

Primal Spell (Weather), Electricity

Basic magical attack actions are explained in the [Simple Magic
Guidelines](#simple-magic-guidelines).
:::

:::description
###### Obscuring Mist

Primal Spell (Weather), Creation, Fog

Create advantage while Primal vs a Mediocre (+0) difficulty to add the
spell Aspect **Obscuring Mist** to my zone or an adjacent zone. This
spell Aspect provides active Average (+1) defense against notice
attempts and targeted abilites. The spell Aspect lasts for an entire
scene or until it has no invokes remaining.
:::

:::description
###### Sleet Spray

Primal Spell (Weather), Cold

While Carefully Primal I suffer a -1 penalty to attack one or more
targets in my zone with a spray of freezing cold sleet, but if I split
shifts between multiple targets the targets each suffer a -1 penalty to
defend against my attack. If I succeed with style and reduce stress to
get a boost the boost is automatically upgraded to the situational
Aspect **Chilled!** with two (2) invokes, which is attached to the
target. This Aspect is automatically invoked at the beginning of
subsequent exchanges to inflict two (2) stress from cold to the target
per invoke. It is a Good (+3) difficulty to remove this Aspect.
:::

# Sample Stunts

## Abyssal Stunts

Stunts strongly related to beings of the Abyss or those descended from
them, such as fiendish demons and tieflings.

:::description
**Abyssal Darkness**: Because I have fiendish lineage, once per session
as an action I have the ability to add the situational Aspect **Abyssal
Darkness** to my zone or an adjacent zone. When I activate this
ability I can choose to spread it to cover additional contiguous zones
at the cost of one (1) Fate point per additional zone. This effect
provides active Superb (+5) defense against notice attempts and targeted
abilites. This Aspect lasts for an entire scene, though it can be
overcome and removed by a character with Arcane, Divine, or Primal of +3
or higher opposed by a Legendary (+8) difficulty. I am unaffected by
this Aspect.
:::

:::description
**Abyssal Lineage**: Because I am born of a bloodline with abyssal
lineage, I gain +2 when I am Flashily Arcane and casting spells related
to fire, darkness, and demonology.
:::

:::description
**Blade Of Abyssal Flame (-3)**: Because of my demonic nature I can
conjure a flaming magical longsword at will; I gain +1 to attack and
defend and can use Focused in place of Combatives while wielding it. If
I get a boost while attacking or defending with it, I may upgrade the
boost to apply the Aspect **Abyssal Flame!** with two (2) invokes on it
to the opponent I am engaged with.
:::

:::description
**Born Of Flame and Darkness**: Because I have fiendish lineage, when I
am Flashily Focused I am able to project searing flames from my body as
an attack at targets within my zone or in an adjacent zone; these
attacks are considered to be Arcane. Additionally I can justify create
advantage, overcome, and defend actions when fire, heat, darkness, or
demons are involved.
:::

:::description
**Demonic Durability**: Because my demonic nature makes me much more
durable than normal, I reduce by two (2) all stress inflicted on me by
physical attacks. However this does not work against magic, cold iron,
or weapons blessed by a benign deity.
:::

:::description
**Demonic Immunity (-3)**: Because of my demonic nature, I am immune to
electricity, fire, disease, and poison. However, positive energy
inflicts 2 extra shifts of stress against me.
:::

:::description
**Fiendish Bane**: Because of my fiendish nature, I inflict two (2)
extra shifts of damage when I physically attack devout followers of
benign deities.
:::

:::description
**Fiendish Bolt**: Because I have learned to channel my fiendish lineage
into my magic, I gain +1 to attack while Flashily Arcane by projecting
an ominously glowing arc of energy at an opponent within four (4) zones
of me.
:::

:::description
**Fiendish Teleportation**: Because I inherited the ability to teleport
(though not effortlessly), once per session as an action I can remove
myself from the scene by teleporting myself elsewhere. My range is
limited to somewhere within approximately fifty (50) miles of my current
location.
:::

:::description
**Fiendish Teleportation (-2)**: Because of my fiendish nature I am able
to teleport myself. Once per scene as an action I can remove myself from
the scene by teleporting elsewhere. My range is limited to somewhere
within approximately five hundred (500) miles of my current location.
:::

:::description
**Mantle Of Abyssal Power (-2)**: Because I am invested with Abyssal
power that cloaks and protects me, I gain +1 when Sneaky to create
advantage or overcome to avoid notice, and I may use Focused to defend
against magic.
:::

:::description
**Profane Gift**: **Because of my demonic nature, once per day I can
attach the Aspect Profane Gift** with two (2) invokes to a single person
I am in intimate contact with. While this Aspect is active the recipient
may invoke it for a +2 bonus to any action they are attempting. Further,
I can make telepathic contact with the recipient and if they are
dominated by me I can issue commands via this contact. The Aspect lasts
one day, can be detected by those with special senses as a Superb (+5)
challenge, and can be removed by those with applicable Arcane abjuration
or Divine abilities by overcoming a Superb (+5) challenge.
:::

:::description
**Summon Babau (-3)**: Because of my fiendish nature, once per session
as an action I can summon a babau demon and command it to serve me for a
scene.

:::description
###### Babau Demon

**Aspects** - Murderously Lethal - Outsider

**Good At**

-   Cruel Murder (+6)
-   Jumping (+3)
-   Stealth (+3)

**Bad At**

-   Resisting Divine (-2)
-   Self-Restraint (-2)

**Stress**:

-   \[1\]\[2\]\[3\]
-   Mild (2)
-   Moderate (4)
-   Severe (6)

The babau is an assassin, a murderer, and a sadist\-\--certainly not
traits unusual in the demons, yet the babau\'s penchant for stealth and
surprise sets it apart from its generally less-subtle kin. With no need
to eat (although most babaus relish the flavor of mortal meat on their
thin, raspy tongues), a babau can wait in ambush for years or
decades\-\--their inhuman patience in anticipating a well-conceived
murder also setting them apart from the other denizens of the Abyss.

Babaus obsess over the act of killing and take great pride in their
grisly art, often leaving behind some form of grim marker or obscure
signature, whether it be a distinctive modus operandi, an unnerving
token, or other profane evidence.

A babau typically carries a longspear or other weapon with which it can
strike at foes beyond its normal reach, but given the opportunity, a
babau prefers to fight with its teeth or claws. The foul, caustic sludge
that constantly seeps from their flesh prevents them from wearing armor
unless it is specially treated or resistant to acid.

A babau is 6 feet tall but weighs only 140 pounds. They form from mortal
souls of lone killers\-\--those who, in life, took pleasure in more
personal and intimate murders. Loosed upon the Material Plane, a babau
often finds itself in the same role, haunting the shadowy corners of the
world as remorseless assassins.
:::
:::

## Alchemy Stunts

Stunts that allow characters to make alchemical items, as described in
[Simple magic options](#simple-magic-options), and related abilities
such as alchemical bombs and mutagenic concoctions.

:::description
**Acid Bombs**: Because of my alchemical studies I am able to create and
then later throw alchemical acid bombs.

When I am Quickly Focused I gain +3 to attack a target within two (2)
zones of me by throwing an alchemical acid bomb at them.

If I am successful, the acid bomb shatters, splashing its contents upon
my target and inflicting damage as stress normally, but if I succeed
with style, I must reduce the stress to get a boost and the boost is
upgraded to the situational Aspect **Acid Burn!** which is attached to
the target.

This Aspect is automatically invoked at the beginning of subsequent
exchanges to inflict two (2) stress to the target per invoke. This
Aspect can be removed by overcoming a Good (+3) difficulty.

For a given session I can carry around and use a number of acid bombs
equal to my (Clever + Arcane). Other people can use my acid bombs; they
still count against my per-session limit however.

This stunt requires Arcane +1 or better to use.
:::

:::description
**Alchemical Belt**: Because I equip myself with a variety of alchemical
items, I often have just the thing for a given situation.

For a given session I can carry around and use a number of alchemical
items from the following list equal to my **((Clever + Arcane) / 2)**
without needing to spend any monetary resources on acquiring them. I
must choose the items I have on me at the start of a session or when
appropriate to the narrative; I can choose any combination from the list
adding up to my per-session limit. Other people can use my alchemical
items; they still count against my limit however.

-   Acid Bomb
-   Alchemists Fire
-   Dust of Appearance
-   Dust of Dryness
-   Everburning Torch
-   Gas Bomb
-   Restorative Elixir
-   Smokestick
-   Sneeze Dust
-   Tanglefoot Bag
-   Trapbusting Kit
-   Vapor of Venting

See [Alchemical Items](#alchemical-items) for detailed write ups.

This stunt requires Arcane +1 or better to use.
:::

:::description
**Alchemical Bombs**: Because of my alchemical studies I am able to
create and then later throw alchemical bombs.

When I am Cleverly Focused I gain +1 to throw a bomb into my zone or an
adjacent zone, generally against an Average (+1) difficulty.

If I am successful, my bomb explodes and inflicts a number of shifts of
damage equal to my (Careful + Arcane) against every target in the zone
without splitting shifts between them. This is non-discriminatory, and
often causes collateral damage.

For a given session I can carry around and use a number of alchemical
bombs equal to my (Clever + Arcane). Other people can not catalyze my
bombs, they are only usable by me.

This stunt requires Arcane +1 or better to use.
:::

:::description
**Gas Bombs**: Because of my alchemical studies I am able to create and
then later throw alchemical gas bombs.

When I am Carefully Focused I gain +3 to attack a target zone within two
(2) zones of me by throwing an alchemical gas bomb.

If I am successful the gas bomb shatters, releasing toxic fumes and
applying the situational Aspect **Toxic Gas!** to the zone with two free
invokes.

This Aspect is automatically invoked now and at the beginning of
subsequent exchanges to inflict two (2) stress per invoke to every
target within the affected zone that needs to breathe. This Aspect can
be removed by strong winds or focused air by overcoming a Good (+3)
difficulty.

For a given session I can carry around and use a number of gas bombs
equal to my (Clever + Arcane). Other people can use my gas bombs; they
still count against my per-session limit however.

This stunt requires Arcane +1 or better to use.
:::

:::description
**Gas Mask**: Because I have a gas mask, while I am wearing it I am
immune to gas-based effects including but not limited to poison gas or
other effects that target the respiratory system including but not
limited to dusts and pheremones. Additionally, improved optics in the
mask\'s goggles grant me a +1 bonus when I am attempting to use my
vision to create advantage or overcome.
:::

:::description
**Holy Water Vials**: Because I have learned a special alchemical
recipe, I am able to make a mildly magical mixture containing holy
water, garlic, powdered silver, and grave dust that causes harm to the
undead. These vials can be thrown, with the liquid splashing out upon
impact to inflict harm on an undead creature.

When I am Quickly Focused I gain +4 to attack an undead target within
one (1) zone of me.

If I am successful, the holy water vial shatters, splashing its contents
upon my target and inflicting damage as stress normally, but this damage
*cannot be reduced* by any innate ability of the target (other
forms of protection such as a magic item or a spell do apply).

For a given session I can carry around and use a number of holy water
vials equal to my **(Clever + Arcane)**. Other people can use my holy
water vials; they still count against my per-session limit however.

This stunt requires Arcane +1 or better to use.
:::

:::description
**Improved Gas Bombs (-2)**: Because of my alchemical studies I am able
to create and then later throw alchemical gas bombs.

When I am Carefully Focused I gain +3 to attack a target zone within two
(2) zones of me by throwing an alchemical gas bomb.

If I am successful the gas bomb shatters, releasing toxic fumes and
applying the situational Aspect **Toxic Gas!** to the targeted zone and
every adjacent zone, with two free invokes.

This Aspect is automatically invoked now and at the beginning of
subsequent exchanges to inflict two (2) stress per invoke to every
target that needs to breathe within the affected zones. This Aspect can
be removed by strong winds or focused air by overcoming a Good (+3)
difficulty.

For a given session I can carry around and use a number of gas bombs
equal to my (Clever + Arcane). Other people can use my gas bombs; they
still count against my per-session limit however.
:::

This stunt requires Arcane +1 or better to use.
:::

:::description
**Mutagen (Beastshape; -2)**: Because I have mastered strange
transmogrifying magics I can concoct substances that allow me to change
my own physical structure and capacity, taking on the forms of animals.
I may spend a Fate point to temporarily assume an animal form. My
trappings magically change with me and are unavailable until I return to
my normal form.

When I change forms I move all of my Approach bonuses to a disposition
relevant to the animal form I am assuming, and I move all of my
Archetype bonuses to Focused (leaving all of my other Archetypes at +0).
This lasts for an entire scene unless I choose to return to normal,
which ends the effect. Additionally, I may spend another Fate point to
assume a different animal\'s form, and I do not have to first change
back to normal.

When I change forms I gain an additional Aspect named for the animal
form I have assumed which I can invoke when my current animal form is
relevant, and which can be compelled whenever my animal form or lack of
humanoid anatomy might inconvenience me.

If the animal form I change into has natural weapons I may use Focused
in place of Combatives while in a physical conflict.

If the animal form I change into has an unusual form of movement, such
as the flight of a bird, the running of a wolf, or the swimming of a
shark then I gain that mode of movement while I am in that form as well,
at the GM\'s discretion.

If the animal form I change into has an unusual or extra keen sense,
such as the low light vision of a cat, the olfactory senses of a canine,
or the echolocation of a bat then I gain that sense while I am in that
form as well, at the GM\'s discretion.

This stunt requires Arcane +1 or better to use.
:::

:::description
**Mutagen (Bruteform)**: Because I have mastered strange transmogrifying
magics I can concoct substances that allow me to change my own physical
structure and capacity, becoming much larger and stronger but at the
cost of greatly diminished intellgence. I may spend a Fate point to
temporarily move all of my Approach bonuses to Forceful (leaving all of
my other Approaches at +0), and to move all of my Archetype bonuses to
Focused (leaving all of my other Archetypes at +0). I also change my
Trouble to **\'Mutagenic Brute\'**. This lasts for an entire scene
unless I spend another Fate point to change back to normal.

This stunt requires Arcane +1 or better to use.
:::

:::description
**Mutagen (Elementalform, -2)**: **Because I have mastered strange
transmogrifying magics I can concoct substances that allow me to change
my own physical structure and capacity. I may spend two (2) Fate
points** to temporarily change into an Elemental.

When I activate this effect I must choose Air, Earth, Fire, or Water.
For the duration of the effect I use the Large Elemental write-up for
the elemental type I have chosen instead of my own character write-up.
(See [sample mutagen elemental forms](#sample-mutagen-elemental-forms)
for example elemental types.)

My transformation lasts for an entire scene but I may change back to my
normal form at any time, ending the effect.

My trappings change with me and are inaccessible for the duration of the
effect.

This stunt requires Arcane +1 or better to use.
:::

:::description
**Potions, Poultices, Poisons**: Because I know ancient lores from more
primitive times, I am able to brew potions, poultices, and poisons that
can harm and heal and work odd and subtle magics on those who imbide
them. I can be Cleverly Arcane and make substances that replicate
effects that are usually the province of Primal. At any given time I can
have a number of substances brewed up and ready for use equal to my
Arcane + Primal capability.

This stunt requires Arcane +1 or better to use.
:::

:::description
**Prepared Caster (Alchemy)**: Because of my studies as a classically
trained Alchemist, given time and opportunity I may \'prepare\' a number
of potions, elixirs, salves and similar \'concoctions\' equal to
((Careful + Clever + Focused) \* Arcane).

Unused concoctions remain until they get activated or destroyed and can
be stockpiled. These Aspects are portable; \[I may\]{.no-wrap} give them
to others and they can be taken away from me.

Making a concoction requires time, materials, and either a lab or a
field kit; the specifics are left to the GM\'s discretion, but simple
potions might take minutes while very powerful potions might take one or
more hours.

If a strict economy is being enforced in the campaign, it usually costs
about half retail price to make a concoction; GM\'s discretion applies.

To prepare a concoction I roll 4dF and add (Focused + Arcane) against a
Mediocre (+0) difficulty; failure indicates a botched concoction and
that \'slot\' is wasted for the day. I temporarily gain a new personal
Aspect corresponding to the concoction I prepared with **one invoke, and
annotated with the margin of success**.

Prepared concoctions are activated by invoking its Aspect as an action
and resolving the effect of the concoction using the previously rolled
margin of success. It is possible for a concoction resolution to fail if
the margin of success is insufficient to the difficulty or if opposed
successfully. If I am the activator, I can spend a Fate point at this
time to add +2 shifts to the margin of success.

Unfortunately due to my focus on Alchemy, I cannot free cast spells.

This stunt requires Arcane +1 or better to use.

*Commodities*

Alchemical concoctions can be given, sold to, or stolen by others and
used by them. They are effectively a commodity.

However all of an alchemist\'s concoctions, including those under
another character\'s control, count against their preparation limit.

*Alchemical Item Write-ups*

A variety of write-ups for \[sample alchemical items\] and \[sample
potions\] are available. Each usage of these kinds of alchemical items
counts against an alchemist\'s preparation limit.

Note that the provided write-ups are just examples, and not a restricted
list of allowed effects; an alchemist can make any sort of alchemical
item the GM allows.
:::

:::description
**Prepared Caster (Alchemy Dabbler)**:

Because I am a capable dabbler in the esoteric science of Alchemy, given
time and opportunity I may \'prepare\' a number of potions, elixirs,
salves and similar \'concoctions\' equal to **(Careful + Arcane)**.

Unused concoctions remain until they get activated or destroyed and can
be stockpiled. These Aspects are portable; \[I may\]{.no-wrap} give them
to others and they can be taken away from me.

Making a concoction requires time, materials, and either a lab or a
field kit; the specifics are left to the GM\'s discretion, but simple
potions might take minutes while very powerful potions might take one or
more hours.

If a strict economy is being enforced in the campaign, it usually costs
about half retail price to make a concoction; GM\'s discretion applies.

To prepare a concoction I roll 4dF and add Arcane against a Mediocre
(+0) difficulty; failure indicates a botched concoction and that
\'slot\' is wasted for the day. I temporarily gain a new personal Aspect
corresponding to the concoction I prepared with **one invoke, and
annotated with the margin of success**.

Prepared concoctions are activated by invoking its Aspect as an action
and resolving the effect of the concoction using the previously rolled
margin of success. It is possible for a concoction resolution to fail if
the margin of success is insufficient to the difficulty or if opposed
successfully. If I am the activator, I can spend a Fate point at this
time to add +2 shifts to the margin of success.

This stunt requires Arcane +1 or better to use.

*Commodities*

Alchemical concoctions can be given, sold to, or stolen by others and
used by them. They are effectively a commodity.

However all of an alchemist\'s concoctions, including those under
another character\'s control, count against their preparation limit.

*Alchemical Item Write-ups*

A variety of write-ups for \[sample alchemical items\] and \[sample
potions\] are available. Each usage of these kinds of alchemical items
counts against an alchemist\'s preparation limit.

Note that the provided write-ups are just examples, and not a restricted
list of allowed effects; an alchemist can make any sort of alchemical
item the GM allows.
:::

:::description
**Rarefied Flesh**: Because I have practiced internal alchemy for many
years and subjected by own flesh to alchemical rarefication, I am more
durable than normal. I reduce by one (1) all stress inflicted on me by
physical and magical attacks.

This stunt requires Arcane +1 or better to use.
:::

:::description
**Restorative Elixir**: Because of my alchemical studies I am able to
create and then later use restorative elixirs.

When I am Carefully Focused I gain +3 to overcome vs a Superb (+5)
difficulty.

If I am successful I remove all debilitating situational Aspects
currently affecting my health or normal functioning that have a
difficulty to remove of Great (+4) or less. This does not work on
environmental Aspects, scene Aspects, or other situational Aspects that
affect me externally, it only works against situational Aspects that
affect me directly and personally such as poison, fatigue, some spells,
curses, and so forth.

Additionally, if I am successful, I may also clear one of my stress
boxes or a Mild Consequence.

To use this ability I must be able to access the elixir and drink its
contents.

For a given session I can make and carry around a number of Restorative
Elixirs equal to my (Clever + Arcane). Other people can use my
restorative elixirs, but only gain +1 while Carefully Focused when using
one of them. Restorative elixirs given to others do count against my
per-session limit.

This stunt requires Arcane +1 or better to use.
:::

:::description
**Sticky Bombs**: Because of my alchemical studies I am able to create
and then later throw alchemical sticky bombs.

When I am Quickly Focused I gain +3 to create advantage against a target
within two (2) zones of me by throwing a sticky bomb at them.

If I am successful, the sticky bomb shatters, splashing its sticky
contents upon my target, attaching the situational Aspect **Trapped By
Sticky Goo!** to the target with three (3) invokes. While this Aspect is
in play, the target is rooted in their current zone and thus cannot move
to another zone. This Aspect can be removed by overcoming a Good (+4)
difficulty, but each failed attempt to overcome it expends an invoke.

This Aspect can be removed by overcoming a Good (+4) difficulty. However
when it is expended or removed a second situational Aspect, **Sticky Goo
Residue!**, is attached to the target with four (4) invokes. The second
Aspect prevents the target from moving more than one (1) zone per
action, and they cannot both move and attack. The second Aspect can be
removed by overcoming a Superb (+6) difficulty, but each failed attempt
to overcome it expends an invoke.

Note that this ability can cause flying targets to plummet to the ground
if they use winged flight.

For a given session I can carry around and use a number of sticky bombs
equal to my (Clever + Arcane). Other people can use my sticky bombs;
they still count against my per-session limit however.

This stunt requires Arcane +1 or better to use.
:::

:::description
**Theriaxis**: Because I am a dedicated scholar who has mastered highly
esoteric magical and medical lore, I am able to make and apply
ointments, salves, nostrums, and elixirs that can heal and repair just
about any form of illness, wound, infection, or impurity. While I am
Carefully Arcane and I have access to my alchemical supplies, I may
clear a Stress box or clear a Consequence by overcoming a difficulty
equal to the numerical value of the stress box or Consequence. If I fail
to overcome the difficulty of a Consequence I may not attempt to heal
that same Consequence again. I may use this ability on others as well as
myself if I am able to examine and treat them. I may use this ability
(Focused + Arcane) times per day.

This stunt requires Arcane +1 or better to use.
:::

:::description
**Trapbusters**: Because of my alchemical studies I am able to create
and then later use special trapbusting kits that allow me to disarm or
disable traps. Each trapbusting kit contains enough raw materials to mix
up an acid or a neutralizing agent or even a small shaped explosive
sufficient to counter one trap.

Using trapbusting kits that I made myself, I gain +5 while Carefully
Roguish to overcome mechanical or magical traps that have a triggering
mechanism.

To use this ability I must be able to access the materials in the
trapbusting kit to mix up a compound to suit the situation and be able
to apply it directly to the triggering mechanism of the trap.

For a given session I can make and carry around a number of trapbusting
kits equal to my (Clever + Arcane + Roguish). Other people can use my
trapbusting kits, but only gain +3 while Carefully Roguish when using
one of them. Trapbusting kits given to others do count against my
per-session limit.

This stunt requires Roguish +1 or better to use. This stunt requires
Arcane +1 or better to use.
:::

:::description
**Utility Belt**: Because I equip myself with a variety of useful
gadgets, tools, solvents, salves, compounds, and other bits, I gain +1
when I am doing something Clever and narratively describe what gizmo or
concoction I pull out of my kit to help me solve a problem.
:::

## Arcanist Stunts

Stunts that allow Arcane characters to expand or specialize their
abilities, better model concepts found in the source material, or take
advantage of ideas presented in the [Simple Magic
Guidelines](#simple-magic-guidelines) guidelines and [Simple Magic
Options](#simple-magic-options).

:::description
**Arcane Aegis**: Because I have mastered protecting myself with magic,
I may use Arcane to defend against physical attacks without needing to
first create an advantage to invoke.
:::

:::description
**Arcane Archery**: Because I am an Arcane Archer, when I am Cleverly
Arcane and use a bow and arrow I get +2 when I attack and the attack is
considered to be magic rather than mundane.
:::

:::description
**Arcane Bolts**: Because I have mastered the art of Arcane Bolts, I
gain +2 when I am Flashily Arcane and attack with ranged magic.
:::

:::description
**Arcane Domination (-2)**: Because of my mastery of mind-affecting
enchantments, while I am Forcefully Arcane I can make mental attacks
against a living target in my zone or an adjacent zone. Consequences
inflicted by this ability pertain to my gaining increasing control over
the target\'s mind. If the target concedes to me, the target must do as
I command in general but retains enough control to avoid doing anything
fundamentally against the target\'s nature. If the target is taken out
with this ability I assume full control of the target\'s behavior until
they are able to recover from the Consequences.
:::

:::description
**Arcane Senses**: Because I have developed my arcane senses to
impressive heights, I may use Arcane instead of Focused to notice or
perceive things and I can sense things that require mystical awareness
to detect.

This stunt requires Arcane +1 or better to use.
:::

:::description
**Bestow Curse**: Because I am skilled at afflicting others with curses,
I get +2 while Arcanely creating advantage by using my magic to put a
situational Aspect representing a curse or other temporary magical
impediment on a living sentient person or creature. The difficulty to
overcome one of my curses with appropriate magic is equal to my (Arcane
+ Primal) bonuses; the target can also overcome the curse themselves
while Carefully Focused but the difficulty is +1 higher. There is no
zone restriction on this ability, but I must be able to see my target,
and I cannot move zones in the same exchange that I use this ability.
:::

:::description
**Chained Lightning**: Because I am able to project a bolt of lighting
that jumps from target to target, once per session when I am Flashily
Arcane and attack I may affect all enemy targets in my zone without
having to split my shifts between them.
:::

:::description
**Charmingly Arcane**: Because I practice using my magic to charm the
unwitting, I\'m very good at it. While I am Sneakily Arcane I can make
social attacks against a living target in my same zone. Consequences
inflicted by this ability pertain to my gaining increasing control over
the target\'s mind. If the target concedes to me, the target must do as
I command in general but retains enough control to avoid doing anything
fundamentally against the target\'s nature. If the target is taken out
with this ability I assume full control of the target\'s behavior until
they are able to recover from the Consequences.
:::

:::description
**Disenchant**: Because I am adept at dispelling persistent magical
effects, I gain +2 while Arcane to overcome situational Aspects put into
play via any kind of magic.
:::

:::description
**Diviner\'s Warning**: Because my skills with divination magics are
very advanced, I can use Arcane instead of Focused to notice things that
could harm me and I gain +2 to do so.
:::

:::description
**Enchanting Beauty**: Because I am adept at using subtle enchantments
to magically enhance my beauty, I may add my Arcane capability as a
bonus to any social interaction where my appearance can be a factor;
however this can be resisted by Arcane and is a Mind-Affecting effect.
:::

:::description
**Enchanting Empathy**: Because I am a master of enchantment magics that
allow me to manipulate the emotional states of others, while I am
Cleverly Arcane I can engage a target in a social conflict and if I
inflict a Consequence I can afflict them with a propensity for a
specific emotion. Consequences such as **Fits Of Uncontrollable Rage**,
**Plunged Into Deep Sadness**, **Gripped By Passionate Love**, and
**Overwhelmed By Euphoric Happiness** incite those afflicted to act out
in ways appropriate to the emotional state I have imposed on them. If,
while I share a scene with the target, a Consequences I have inflicted
with this ability is compelled and the target spends a fate point to
refuse the compel, I gain the fate point immediately.
:::

:::description
**Evil Eye**: Because I can hex others with the power of the Evil Eye, I
gain +2 while Arcanely creating advantage to attach the spell Aspect
**The Eye Is Upon You** to a person or creature in my zone that I can
see. This spell Aspect lasts until it has no more invokes remaining or
it is overcome. Anyone in the scene may invoke this Aspect to penalize
or interfere with the target\'s actions.
:::

:::description
**Familiar (Bonded)**: Because I have a mystical familiar I am always
accompanied by an animal that is particularly smart and capable for its
kind. However, the life force of my familiar is bound to my own. If my
familiar is slain I immediately take a Severe Consequence **Severed
Familiar Bond** and I cannot gain a new familiar until this consequence
has been cleared.

:::description
###### Bonded Familiar

**Aspects**

-   Two (2) Aspects

**Good At**

-   Spread +4 around one to four skill-like abilities

**Bad At**

-   Spread -4 around one to four skill-like abilities

**Stress**:

-   \[1\]\[2\]\[3\]
-   Mild (2)
-   Moderate (4)
:::
:::

:::description
**Familiar (Proxy)**: Because I have a mystical familiar I am always
accompanied by an animal that is particularly smart and capable for its
kind. However, my familiar is the repository of all my known spells and
if they are killed I cannot cast Arcane spells until I get a replacement
familiar.

:::description
###### Proxy Familiar

**Aspects**

-   Two (2) Aspects

**Good At**

-   Spread +4 around one to four skill-like abilities

**Bad At**

-   Spread -4 around one to four skill-like abilities

**Stress**:

-   \[1\]\[2\]\[3\]
-   Mild (2)
-   Moderate (4)

**Stunts**

-   **Spell Proxy**: My owner can treat targets in the zone that I am in
    as if they were in their zone for purposes of spells and spell-like
    abilities that only affect targets in the caster\'s zone.
:::
:::

:::description
**Fireburst**: Because I am able to cause a mystical explosion to occur,
once per session when I am Flashily Arcane and attack I may affect all
targets in up to two contiguous adjacent zones without having to split
my shifts between them. This is non-discriminatory, and often causes
collateral damage.
:::

:::description
**Forced Dementia**: Because I have the ability to afflict the minds of
others with mental confusion and temporary insanity, I gain +1 while
Arcane to create advantage on a foe within my zone to place the
situational Aspect **Demented Confusion** upon them. The recipient may
be compelled by the GM or other players to do bizarre and illogical (but
not suicidal) things. The Aspect lasts for a scene but can be overcome
via appropriate magic as a Superb (+5) difficulty challenge. The
recipient themselves can also overcome the Aspect while Carefully
Focused as a Fantastic (+6) difficulty challenge. This is a
mind-affecting ability.

This stunt requires Arcane +1 or better to use.
:::

:::description
**Hedge Arcanist**: Because I practice a more ancient form of Arcane
magic that remains connected to the natural world, while Arcane I can
cast spells that replicate effects that are usually the province of
Primal. Further, I may also add my Primal capability modifier as a bonus
to my roll when I do so.

This stunt requires Primal +1 or better to use.
:::

:::description
**Herbal Lore**: Because I know the secrets of many plants, when I am
Carefully Arcane I may create a potion, poultice, or poison using magics
that are normally the domain of Primal, and I may add my Primal
capability modifier (if any) as a bonus. Additionally, I can identify
mundane poisons, provide simple remedies for headaches and minor mundane
illnesses, embellish prepared food, and other such things when my herbal
lore is relevant.
:::

:::description
**Levitation**: Because I have mastered the art of mystic levitation,
while I am Flashily Arcane I may attempt to overcome a Superb (+5)
difficulty to create the situational Aspect **Levitating** on myself.
While this Aspect is in play I may levitate; while levitating I am
unaffected by obstacles that I can levitate over, and I can hover out of
easy reach of the ground thus frustrating melee attackers. This Aspect
can be overcome by appropriate magic, with a Legendary (+8) difficulty.
I cannot invoke the Aspect for any additional benefit.
:::

:::description
**Mage Armor Knack**: Because I have a minor magical knack, I can create
advantage while Carefully Arcane vs an Average (+1) difficulty to apply
the Aspect **Mage Armor** to myself. While this Aspect is active I gain
+2 when defending against physical or damaging magical attacks. This
Aspect may also be invoked to offer additional protection when defending
from physical or magical harm. This Aspect can be overcome and removed
as a Superb (+5) difficulty by those with Arcane +3 or higher.

This stunt requires Arcane +1 or better to use.
:::

:::description
**Mana Bolts**: Because I am able to launch target-seeking magical
bolts, when I am Cleverly Arcane and attack I may spend a Fate point or
suffer the Mild Consequence **Spell Fatigue** to affect all enemy
targets in an adjacent zone without having to split my shifts between
them.
:::

:::description
**Necromantic Enervation**: Because I am a master of necromancy, I am
able to drain the life energy from others. While I am Sneakily Arcane I
can attack others with \'Life Draining\' spells; in addition to the
stress if I inflict a Consequence on my target I afflict them with
enervation and ennui. Consequences such as **Easily Fatigued**, **Fits
Of Ennui**, **Prone To Depression**, and **Sunk Into A Deep Funk** cause
those afflicted to struggle to motivate and empower themselves, to
unexpectedly lose interest in being active, become unconcerned about
succeeding in their endeavors, and so forth. If a target is taken out in
this way, they die and rise again as an Undead minion that I can control
for the remainder of the scene and possibly longer at the GM\'s
discretion.
:::

:::description
**Prepared Caster (Arcane)**: Because of my studies as a classically
trained arcanist, each morning I may \'prepare\' a number of \'spells\'
equal to ((Careful + Clever) \* Arcane).

To prepare a spell I roll 4dF against a Mediocre (+0) difficulty, adding
a preparation bonus equal to double my Arcane bonus.

I temporarily gain a new personal Aspect corresponding to the spell I
prepared with **one invoke, and annotated with the margin of success**.

Later during the day I may \'cast\' a prepared spell by invoking its
Aspect as an action and resolving the spell using the previously rolled
margin of success.

It is possible for a spell resolution to fail if the margin of success
is insufficient to the difficulty or if I am opposed successfully. I can
spend a Fate point at this time to add +2 shifts to the margin of
success.

Unfortunately due to my focus on prepared casting, I cannot free cast
anything other than simple arcane spells known as cantrips.

*Using Spell Write-ups*

If I am preparing a spell from a write-up that indicates an Approach be
combined with Arcane to cast the spell, with language such as \'while
Cleverly Arcane\', I ignore the requirement and use my prepared bonus
instead.

If I am preparing a spell from a write-up that states a particular
difficulty level, with language such as \'vs a Good (+3) difficulty)\',
the previously rolled margin of success is applied against the stated
difficulty when I \'cast\' it; any remaining shifts can be allocated per
the [Simple Magic Guidelines](#simple-magic-guidelines).
:::

:::description
**Scroll Scrivener**: Because I have mastered the art of scribing
scrolls, I can be Cleverly Arcane and prepare \'spell completion\' items
as scrolls or similar items for specific spell effects that I can cast.
I can later cast the inscribed spell (using the simple magic system
guidelines) from the item, gaining a bonus in the process. Other
characters with Arcane +1 or better can also use my scrolls. I can also
stockpile unused scrolls, as well as use scrolls inscribed by others.
Unless explicitly denied means and opportunity, I can prepare a number
of new scrolls ready for use equal to my Arcane capability each day.
:::

:::description
**Shocking Touch**: Because I am able to generate a magical paralyzing
shock, I may use Arcane instead of Focused when fighting barehanded or
grappling.
:::

:::description
**Skilled Abjurer**: Because I am skilled at using abjurations to
nullify magic, I get +1 when I am Arcane and defend or overcome using
abjuration magic.
:::

:::description
**Skilled Conjurer**: Because I am skilled at using conjurations for
summoning minions to do by bidding, I get +2 when I am Arcane and
overcome using conjuration magic to summon a servitor.
:::

:::description
**Skilled Diviner**: Because I am skilled at using divinations to know
the unknown, I get +1 when I am Arcane and create advantage or overcome
using divination magic.
:::

:::description
**Skilled Enchanter**: Because I am skilled at using enchantments to
bend others to my will, I get +1 when I am Arcane and create advantage
or overcome using enchantment magic.
:::

:::description
**Skilled Illusionist**: Because I am skilled at using my illusions to
hide the truth, I get +2 when I am Arcane and create an advantage using
illusion magics to deceive.
:::

:::description
**Skilled Invoker**: Because I am skilled at using evocations to wreak
mayhem, I get +1 when I am Arcane and attack using evocation magic.
:::

:::description
**Skilled Necromancer**: Because I am skilled at using my necromancy, I
get +1 when I am Arcane and create advantage or attack using necromantic
magic.
:::

:::description
**Skilled Transmuter**: Because I am skilled at using transmutations to
change the fundamental nature of things, I get +1 when I am Arcane and
create advantage or overcome using transmutation magic.
:::

:::description
**Spell Mastery (Hideous Laughter)**: Because I have mastered the
[Hideous Laughter](#hideous-laughter-1) spell, whenever I am being
Arcane and gain a boost I may use that boost to add two (2) additional
free invokes to any **Hideous Laughter** situational Aspects that I have
put into play (if any).
:::

:::description
**Spell Mastery (Prismatic Spray)**:

Because I have mastered the [Prismatic Spray] spell, I\'ve gotten really
good at catching as many people as possible inside of the arc. When I
cast \'Prismatic Spray\' and split shifts between multiple targets
within my zone or an adjacent zone, the targets each suffer a -1 penalty
to defend against my attack.

Additionally, if any target takes a consequence from this attack I can
force it to be called **Dazzled By Prismacolor!** and I get an extra
free invoke on it.
:::

:::description
**Spell Turning**: Because I am able to reflect magic to protect myself,
once per scene if I am the target of an Arcane spell and I am aware of
it I may overcome the same difficulty required to cast the spell while
Cleverly Arcane; however I suffer a -2 penalty to my roll. If I am
successful the spell has no effect on me and I turn the spell back upon
its caster, against whom the spell has its full normal effect.
:::

:::description
**Spell Turning (-2)**: Because I am able to reflect magic to protect
myself, once per exchange if I am the target of an Arcane spell and I am
aware of it I may overcome the same difficulty required to cast the
spell while Cleverly Arcane; however I suffer a -2 penalty to my roll.
If I am successful the spell has no effect on me and I turn the spell
back upon its caster, against whom the spell has its full normal effect.
:::

:::description
**Witch\'s Fire**: Because I can sicken others with magical energies,
while Flashily Arcane I suffer a -1 penalty to attack one or more
targets in my zone with a blast of eerie mystical energies, but if I
split shifts between multiple targets the targets each suffer a -1
penalty to defend against my attack. If I succeed with style against any
of the targets in all cases I must reduce the stress to get a boost, but
the boost is automatically upgraded to the situational Aspect
**Sickened** with two (2) invokes, which is attached to the affected
target. This Aspect is automatically invoked at the beginning of
subsequent exchanges to inflict two (2) stress to the target per invoke
as the magical attack continues to linger; the target cannot defend
against this additional stress but may apply any resistances or
protection they have such as damage reduction or immunity to magic.
:::

## Archer Stunts

Stunts related to shooting bows and arrows.

:::description
**Archer Savant**: Because my skill with a bow is sublime, I may use
Focused instead of Combative to attack with any kind of bow and arrow.
:::

:::description
**Big Shot**: Because I am able to put it all on the line for one big
shot, when I am Flashy and attack with a bow and arrow I may spend a
Fate point to roll 8dF instead of 4dF and choose the four best dice as
my result.
:::

:::description
**Double Shot**: Because I am skilled at rapidly shooting twice as fast
as normal, I gain +1 when I am Quick and attack with any kind of bow or
a reapeating crossbow or two crossbows against a target within my zone
or an adjacent zone and if I hit I may make a second identical attack
against the same target using the rolled result of the first attack
rather than rolling to attack again. The target gets to defend against
the second attack as normal.
:::

:::description
**Hunting Archer**: Because I am a master archer and hunter, I may use
Primal instead of Combative to attack with any kind of bow and arrow.
:::

:::description
**Quick Shot**: Because I am skilled at rapidly shooting arrows, I gain
+1 when I am Quick and attack with any kind of bow or a hand crossbow
against a target in my zone or an adjacent zone. If I hit I inflict +1
shift of additional stress.
:::

:::description
**Skilled Archer**: Because I am a skilled archer, I gain +1 when I am
using any sort of bow and arrow or crossbow to attack.
:::

:::description
**Snipers Aim**: Because I am a skilled sniper, I gain +3 when I
Carefully attack with any kind of bow and arrow or crossbow. I may not
move in the same exchange that I use this ability.
:::

:::description
**Zen Archer**: Because I am one with the target, once per scene when I
Carefully attack with any kind of bow and arrow and miss I get a free
reroll and I gain +2 to hit on the second roll.
:::

## Bigger Stunts

Stunts related to being bigger than normal sized.

:::description
**Big Advantage**: Because I am adept at using my large size to my
advantage, I gain +2 to create advantage or overcome while Focused
whenever my large size is a factor.
:::

:::description
**Big Break**: Because normal sized things are so fragile, I gain +2
when I physically attack a normal sized inanimate object or to overcome
a physical obstacle if my large size is relevant.
:::

:::description
**Big Strikes**: Because it is easier to hit things due to my large
surface area, when I attack barehanded or with a big weapon and split
shifts between multiple targets, each target suffers a -1 penalty to
defend against my attack.
:::

:::description
**Big Strong**: Because I am bigger and stronger than normal, I gain +1
while Focused whenever my large size or impressive strength is a factor.
:::

## Bloodline Stunts

Stunts related to having an unusual bloodline that grants special
abilities. Typically associated with \[sorcerers\] in the source
material, but freely usable in Pathfinder Fate Accelerated whereever
they might be appropriate to fill out a character concept.

Bloodlines bundle a bunch of abilities together. Ideally a character
just takes the entire bundle as is, but cherry-picking is permitted.

Many bloodlines have an Approach and / or Archetype bonus requirement.
To take the bloodline a character must have at least the required level
of bonus. For instance, the Abyssal Bloodline requires a character to
have at least Flashy +1 and Focused +1 to take it.

:::description
**Abyssal Bloodline (-5)**:

This bloodline requires Flashy +1 and Focused +1 or better to use.

-   **Natural Weapons**: Because I have natural weapons and am skilled
    in their use, I may use Focused instead of Combative when my natural
    weapons are relevant. In situations where it matters I can choose to
    be treated as attacking barehanded or attacking with a weapon,
    whichever benefits me more in the situation. Finally, though I can
    be inconvenienced and my natural weapons can be fouled or
    restrained, being disarmed is generally off the table for me.
-   **Demonic Durability**: Because my demonic nature makes me much more
    durable than normal, I reduce by two (2) all stress inflicted on me
    by physical attacks. However this does not work against magic, cold
    iron, or weapons blessed by a benign deity.
-   **Fiendish Teleportation**: Because I inherited the ability to
    teleport (though not effortlessly), once per session as an action I
    can remove myself from the scene by teleporting myself elsewhere. My
    range is limited to somewhere within approximately fifty (50) miles
    of my current location.
-   **Mantle Of Abyssal Power (-2)**: Because I am invested with Abyssal
    power that cloaks and protects me, I gain +1 when Sneaky to create
    advantage or overcome to avoid notice, and I may use Focused to
    defend against magic.
:::

:::description
**Accursed Bloodline (-5)**:

This bloodline requires Primal +1 or better to use.

This bloodline requires Arcane +1 or better to use.

-   **Hedge Arcanist**: Because I practice a more ancient form of Arcane
    magic that remains connected to the natural world, while Arcane I
    can cast spells that replicate effects that are usually the province
    of Primal. Further, I may also add my Primal capability modifier as
    a bonus to my roll when I do so.
-   **Evil Eye**: Because I can hex others with the power of the Evil
    Eye, I gain +2 while Arcanely creating advantage to attach the spell
    Aspect **The Eye Is Upon You** to a person or creature in my zone
    that I can see. This spell Aspect lasts until it has no more invokes
    remaining or it is overcome. Anyone in the scene may invoke this
    Aspect to penalize or interfere with the target\'s actions.
-   **Forbidding Presence**: Because I present a very intimidating and
    stern visage while emanating a frightenting aura, I gain +1 when
    being Flashy and attempting to frighten or demoralize.
-   **Forced Dementia**: Because I have the ability to afflict the minds
    of others with mental confusion and temporary insanity, I gain +1
    while Arcane to create advantage on a foe within my zone to place
    the situational Aspect **Demented Confusion** upon them. The
    recipient may be compelled by the GM or other players to do bizarre
    and illogical (but not suicidal) things. The Aspect lasts for a
    scene but can be overcome via appropriate magic as a Superb (+5)
    difficulty challenge. The recipient themselves can also overcome the
    Aspect while Carefully Focused as a Fantastic (+6) difficulty
    challenge. This is a mind-affecting ability.
-   **Damage Reduction**: Because I am more durable than normal, I
    reduce by one (1) all stress inflicted on me by physical and magical
    attacks.
:::

:::description
**Aquatic Bloodline (-5)**:

This bloodline requires Primal +1 or better to use.

-   **Water Breather**: Because I am able to breath underwater and I am
    comfortable when in aquatic environments, I am able to breath
    underwater indefinitely even if unconscious and I gain +1 to create
    advantage and overcome while in the water.
-   **Fast Swimmer**: Because I am a fast swimmer, I may move an extra
    zone for free when swimming and this does not prevent me from
    attacking. Alternately, if I do nothing but move while swimming I
    may use this ability to move two (2) extra zones.
-   **Darkvision**: Because I have Darkvision I can see perfectly in
    total darkness.
-   **Damage Reduction**: Because I am more durable than normal, I
    reduce by one (1) all stress inflicted on me by physical and magical
    attacks.
-   **Control Aquatic Creatures**: Because I can control aquatic
    creatures, I can justify using Primal to have social encounters with
    aquatic creatures as if I share a language with them, and under most
    circumstances they are generally friendly to me. I also gain +1 to
    create advantages related to gaining aid or cooperation from aquatic
    creatures.
:::

:::description
**Boreal Bloodline (-5)**:

This bloodline requires Primal +1 or better to use.

This bloodline requires Arcane +1 or better to use.

-   **Hedge Arcanist**: Because I practice a more ancient form of Arcane
    magic that remains connected to the natural world, while Arcane I
    can cast spells that replicate effects that are usually the province
    of Primal. Further, I may also add my Primal capability modifier as
    a bonus to my roll when I do so.
-   **Enervating Cold**: Because I am able to drain the life energy from
    others with intense cold, if I inflict a Consequence on a target
    with cold or ice based magics I afflict them with enervation and
    ennui. Consequences such as **Easily Fatigued**, **Frostbitten**,
    **Debilitating Shivers**, and **Cold Stiffened Limbs** cause those
    afflicted to struggle to take even basic physical and mental
    actions, struggle against cold-numbness, and so forth.
-   **Freezing Bolt**: Because I can offensively focus blistering
    coldness, I gain +1 to attack while Flashily Arcane by projecting a
    ray of freezing cold air and ice shards at an opponent within
    two (2) zones of me. If I get a boost, it is automatically upgraded
    to the Aspect **Numbed By Cold** with two (2) invokes on it. This
    aspect can be overcome as a Great (+4) challenge.
-   **Icy Shield**: Because I am able to create a shield of hardened ice
    to protect myself, I gain +2 to defend against physical and
    elemental attacks while Quick if I am aware of the attack and able
    to move. This ability does not work in hot and dry environments.
-   **Immune To Cold**: Because I am immune to cold, I am unaffected by
    any malign effect that relies on cold.
:::

:::description
**Celestial Bloodline (-5)**:

This bloodline requires Flashy +1 and Divine +1 or better to use.

-   **Rally Leader**: Because I am able to inspire my allies to regroup
    and rally, once per scene I can give a motivating monologue or shout
    out words of courage and valor to allow all allies within one (1)
    zone of me to clear one of their stress boxes or a Mild consequence.
-   **Celestial Ray**: Because I have learned to channel my celestial
    lineage into an attack, I gain +1 to attack while Flashy by
    projecting a brightly glowing arc of energy at an opponent within
    two (2) zones of me. I may also add my Divine Archetype (if any) as
    a bonus to my roll.
-   **Celestial Bane**: Because of my celestial nature, I inflict
    two (2) extra shifts of damage when I physically attack devout
    followers of malign deities.
-   **Mantle Of Celestial Power (-2)**: Because I am invested with
    celestial power that empowers and protects me, I gain +1 while
    Flashy to defend against attacks, and I may cast pure revealing
    light in all directions from my person to brightly illuminate my
    zone.
:::

:::description
**Destined Bloodline (-5)**:

This bloodline requires Sneaky +1 and Focused +1 or better to use.

**Better Lucky Than Good**: Because I am unusually lucky, whenever I
make a 4dF resolution roll and the result is \[0 0 0 0\] (all blanks) I
treat the outcome as if I had rolled \[+ + + +\] (all pluses).\]

**Secret Signs**: Because I have an unusual mystical talent I sometimes
see signs, portents, and sigils that provide me with information about
the present or near future that I could not possibly know otherwise. I
gain +2 while I am Focused and create advantage when I attempt to
discover or notice some detail, fact, Aspect, or truth about the scene,
or a person or group in it, even if it would not normally be possible
for me to know or detect this information with merely mundane senses.

**Close Call**: Because I excel at getting out of really bad situations,
I can spend a fate point to concede after I already rolled to defend
(normally a concession must be made instead of rolling to defend).

**Sublime Expertise (-2)**: Because I am extremely skilled and rarely
blunder, whenever I make a 4dF roll I treat any result of less than 0 as
-1.
:::

:::description
**Draconic Bloodline (-5)**

This bloodline requires Forceful +1 and Focused +1 or better to use.

-   **Natural Weapons**: Because I have natural weapons and am skilled
    in their use, I may use Focused instead of Combative when my natural
    weapons are relevant. In situations where it matters I can choose to
    be treated as attacking barehanded or attacking with a weapon,
    whichever benefits me more in the situation. Finally, though I can
    be inconvenienced and my natural weapons can be fouled or
    restrained, being disarmed is generally off the table for me.
-   **Supernatural Durability**: Because I am descended from one or more
    supernatural ancestors I am more durable than normal. I reduce by
    one (1) all non-magical stress inflicted on me.
-   **Spell-like Abilities**: Because my lineage grants me innate
    magical capabilities, I may use my Focused Archetype instead of the
    Arcane Archetype to activate a small set of specific magical
    abilities and to intuitively understand magical phenomenon related
    to my particular lineage. GM\'s discretion applies.
-   **Breath Weapon (-2)**: Because I am able to expel a specific kind
    of breath attack from my mouth, once per scene I may make a special
    attack affecting all targets (animate and inanimate) in my zone
    without having to split my shifts between them. In addition to
    inflicting stress, I can also re-use the results of my attack roll
    to attempt to overcome or alter a single situtational aspect present
    in the affected zone if I can narratively justify it; for instance I
    could overcome an obstruction by destroying it. This attack is
    non-discriminatory and often causes collateral damage at the GM\'s
    discretion, such as modifying ambient descriptors within the
    affected zone to reflect a damaged or ruined state; for instance a
    **Fancy Hotel Room** descriptor aspect might be altered to instead
    be **Scorched Hotel Room**.
:::

:::description
**Eldritch Bloodline (-5)**:

This bloodline requires Arcane +4 or better to use.

-   **Arcane Senses**: Because I have developed my arcane senses to
    impressive heights, I may use Arcane instead of Focused to notice or
    perceive things and I can sense things that require mystical
    awareness to detect.
-   **Arcane Aegis**: Because I have mastered protecting myself with
    magic, I may use Arcane to defend against physical attacks without
    needing to first create an advantage to invoke.
-   **Arcane Bolts**: Because I have mastered the art of Arcane Bolts, I
    gain +2 when I am Flashily Arcane and attack with ranged magic.
-   **Levitation**: Because I have mastered the art of mystic
    levitation, while I am Flashily Arcane I may attempt to overcome a
    Superb (+5) difficulty to create the situational Aspect
    **Levitating** on myself. While this Aspect is in play I may
    levitate; while levitating I am unaffected by obstacles that I can
    levitate over, and I can hover out of easy reach of the ground thus
    frustrating melee attackers. This Aspect can be overcome by
    appropriate magic, with a Legendary (+8) difficulty. I cannot invoke
    the Aspect for any additional benefit.
-   **Spell Turning**: Because I am able to reflect magic to protect
    myself, once per scene if I am the target of an Arcane spell and I
    am aware of it I may overcome the same difficulty required to cast
    the spell while Cleverly Arcane; however I suffer a -2 penalty to my
    roll. If I am successful the spell has no effect on me and I turn
    the spell back upon its caster, against whom the spell has its full
    normal effect.
:::

:::description
**Elemental Air Bloodline (-5)**:

This bloodline requires Flashy +1 and Primal +1 or better to use.

This bloodline requires Arcane +1 or better to use.

-   **Aeromancer**: Because I have mastered the ancient magics of the
    Element of Air, I may combine my Arcane and Primal Archetypes when I
    am casting spells related to air, wind, lighting, weather, and so
    forth.
-   **Air Walk**: Because of my elemental affinity, I may walk upon the
    air as if I weighed no more than a feather. I am never harmed or
    unduly inconvenienced by falling, even if I am unconscious. However
    this effect is temporarily cancelled if I am encumbered or anchored
    by more than half my own body weight.
-   **Shocking Touch**: Because I am able to generate a magical
    paralyzing shock, I may use Arcane instead of Focused when fighting
    barehanded or grappling.
-   **Lightning Arc**: Because of my elemental affinity I am able to
    project an arc of electricity that jumps from target to target, when
    I am Flashily Primal and attack I may spend a Fate point to affect
    all enemy targets in my zone without having to split my shifts
    between them.
-   **Immune To Electricity**: Because I am immune to electricity, I am
    unaffected by any malign effect that relies on electricity.
:::

:::description
**Elemental Earth Bloodline (-5)**:

This bloodline requires Flashy +1 and Primal +1 or better to use.

This bloodline requires Arcane +1 or better to use.

-   **Geomancer**: Because I have mastered the ancient magics of the
    Element of Earth, I may combine my Arcane and Primal Archetypes when
    I am casting spells related to earth, rock, seismic vibrations, and
    so forth.
-   **Stoney Skin**: Because of my elemental affinity I am able to
    protect myself with a stoney skin that shields me from damage, I
    reduce by one (1) all stress inflicted on me by physical and magical
    attacks.
-   **Hammer Of Stone (-3)**: Because of my elemental affinity I can
    conjure a fearsome stone hammer at will; I gain +1 to attack and
    defend and can use Primal in place of Combatives while wielding it.
    If I get a boost while attacking or defending with it, I may upgrade
    the boost to apply the Aspect **Stunned!** with two (2) invokes on
    it to the opponent I am engaged with.
:::

:::description
**Elemental Fire Bloodline (-5)**:

This bloodline requires Flashy +1 and Primal +1 or better to use.

This bloodline requires Arcane +1 or better to use.

-   **Pyromancer**: Because I have mastered the ancient magics of the
    Element of Fire, I may combine my Arcane and Primal Archetypes when
    I am casting spells related to fire, heat, combustion, and so forth.
-   **Immune To Fire**: Because I am immune to fire, I am unaffected by
    any malign effect that relies on fire.
-   **Blade Of Fire (-3)**: Because of my elemental affinity I can
    conjure a flaming magical sword at will; I gain +1 to attack and
    defend and can use Primal in place of Combatives while wielding it.
    If I get a boost while attacking or defending with it, I may upgrade
    the boost to apply the Aspect **On Fire!** with two (2) invokes on
    it to the opponent I am engaged with.
:::

:::description
**Elemental Water Bloodline (-5)**:

This bloodline requires Flashy +1 and Primal +1 or better to use.

This bloodline requires Arcane +1 or better to use.

-   **Hydromancer**: Because I have mastered the ancient magics of the
    Element of Water, I may combine my Arcane and Primal Archetypes when
    I am casting spells related to water, precipitation, steam, mist,
    liquids, and so forth.
-   **Control Water**: Because I am skilled at controlling and
    manipulating water with my magics, I gain +1 while I am Cleverly
    Arcane and attack, defend, create advantage, or overcome when I can
    make a reasonable volume of water relevant to the narrative.
-   **Water Breather**: Because I am able to breath underwater and I am
    comfortable when in aquatic environments, I am able to breath
    underwater indefinitely even if unconscious and I gain +1 to create
    advantage and overcome while in the water.
-   **Fast Swimmer**: Because I am a fast swimmer, I may move an extra
    zone for free when swimming and this does not prevent me from
    attacking. Alternately, if I do nothing but move while swimming I
    may use this ability to move two (2) extra zones.
-   **Fluid Resistance**: Because I excel at avoiding harm and rolling
    with whatever comes my way, I can use more than one stress box to
    absorb stress from an attack (normally, only one stress box may be
    used to offset stress from a single attack).
:::

:::description
**Fey Bloodline (-5)**:

This bloodline requires Sneaky +1 and Primal +1 or better to use.

This bloodline requires Arcane +1 or better to use.

-   **Hedge Arcanist**: Because I practice a more ancient form of Arcane
    magic that remains connected to the natural world, while Arcane I
    can cast spells that replicate effects that are usually the province
    of Primal. Further, I may also add my Primal capability modifier as
    a bonus to my roll when I do so.
-   **Pass Without Trace**: Because of my mastery of the natural world,
    I gain +1 when I am Sneakily Primal while in the wildlands, I am
    unobstructed by undergrowth, and if I take a full move I may move
    three zones instead of two. Finally, tracking me in wildland areas
    is very difficult; those attempting it must overcome a difficulty
    equal to my **((Sneaky + Primal) \* 2)**.
-   **Willful Invisibility**: Because I can turn invisibile at will, if
    I do not attack or create advantage in an exchange I may place the
    situational Aspect **\'Invisible\'** on myself as a free action that
    takes no time before or after my normal action. If I attack or
    create advantage while invisible, this Aspect is immediately removed
    and I become visibile for at least one (1) exchange before I am able
    to use this ability to become invisible again. My innate
    invisibility can be temporarily neutralized by those with unusual
    senses or magic or special items creating an applicable advantage;
    the difficulty to do so is Superb (+5). It can also be overcome and
    thus removed by some abilities that explicitly counter invisibility
    or dispel magic; the difficulty to do so is Fantastic (+6).
:::

:::description
**Wild Shape (-2)**: Because I have the ability to change into the form
of any normal animal of my choice, I may spend a Fate point to
temporarily assume an animal form. My trappings magically change with me
and are unavailable until I return to my normal form.

When I change forms I move all of my Approach bonuses to a disposition
relevant to the animal form I am assuming, and I move all of my
Archetype bonuses to Focused (leaving all of my other Archetypes at +0).
This lasts for an entire scene unless I choose to return to normal,
which ends the effect. Additionally, I may spend another Fate point to
assume a different animal\'s form, and I do not have to first change
back to normal.

When I change forms I gain an additional Aspect named for the animal
form I have assumed which I can invoke when my current animal form is
relevant, and which can be compelled whenever my animal form or lack of
humanoid anatomy might inconvenience me.

If the animal form I change into has natural weapons I may use Focused
in place of Combatives while in a physical conflict.

If the animal form I change into has an unusual form of movement, such
as the flight of a bird, the running of a wolf, or the swimming of a
shark then I gain that mode of movement while I am in that form as well,
at the GM\'s discretion.

If the animal form I change into has an unusual or extra keen sense,
such as the low light vision of a cat, the olfactory senses of a canine,
or the echolocation of a bat then I gain that sense while I am in that
form as well, at the GM\'s discretion.
:::

:::description
**Imperious Bloodline (-5)**:

This bloodline requires Flashy +1 and Focused +1 or better to use.

-   **Inspiring Leadership**: Because I inspire my allies and followers,
    any allies who join me in battle gain +1 on all actions they take
    within a conflict while being Combative. Allies must be within
    three (3) zones and within line of sight of me to benefit from my
    leadership. This ability applies for the duration of the conflict
    even if I am taken out, as my allies are moved to protect or avenge
    me.
-   **Commanding Voice**: Because I am able to speak in a commanding
    voice that compels obedience in those of lesser willpower; I may use
    Focused for social interactions if I can talk, and I am resisted by
    Focused when I do so. This is a mind-affecting effect.
-   **Will To Power**: Because my will to push forward to victory is
    absolute, once per session I may gain +4 when attempting to overcome
    any one (1) situational Aspect in my zone or an adjacent zone.
-   **Reflect Magic (-2)**: Because I am able to reflect magic to
    protect myself, once per exchange if I am the target of a spell and
    I am aware of it I may overcome the same difficulty required to cast
    the spell while Quickly Focused; however I suffer a -2 penalty to my
    roll. If I am successful the spell has no effect on me and I turn
    the spell back upon its caster, against whom the spell has its full
    normal effect.
:::

:::description
**Infernal Bloodline (-5)**:

This bloodline requires Clever +1 and Focused +1 or better to use.

-   **Diabolic Agony**: Because I have learned to project intense pain
    into the minds of others, I gain +1 to attack while Cleverly Focused
    by intensely concentrating upon an opponent in my zone or an
    adjacent zone. If I get a boost it is automatically upgraded to the
    situational Aspect **Debilitating Pain** with two (2) invokes. This
    Aspect can be removed as a Great (+4) challenge. This is a
    mind-affecting effect.
-   **Diabolic Durability**: Because my infernal nature makes me much
    more durable than normal, I reduce by two (2) all stress inflicted
    on me by physical attacks. However this does not work against magic,
    cold iron, or weapons blessed by a benign deity.
-   **Diabolic Teleportation**: Because I inherited the ability to
    teleport (though not effortlessly), once per session as an action I
    can remove myself from the scene by teleporting myself elsewhere. My
    range is limited to somewhere within approximately fifty (50) miles
    of my current location.
-   **Mantle Of Infernal Power (-2)**: Because I am invested with
    infernal power that empowers and protects me, I gain +2 when Clever
    to create advantage and overcome in social encounters when I can
    bring my sharp wits to bear. Additionally I gain +1 to defend while
    Arcane.
:::

:::description
**Verdant Bloodline (-5)**:

This bloodline requires Primal +1 or better to use.

This bloodline requires Arcane +1 or better to use.

-   **Hedge Arcanist**: Because I practice a more ancient form of Arcane
    magic that remains connected to the natural world, while Arcane I
    can cast spells that replicate effects that are usually the province
    of Primal. Further, I may also add my Primal capability modifier as
    a bonus to my roll when I do so.
-   **Plant Traits**: Because of my verdant nature, I am immune to
    mind-affecting effects (charms, compulsions, morale effects,
    patterns, and phantasms), paralysis, poison, polymorph, sleep, and
    stun. However I take +1 shift of stress from attacks that rely on
    cold, fire, acid, or are described as being especially effective vs
    plant life.
-   **Pass Without Trace**: Because of my mastery of the natural world,
    I gain +1 when I am Sneakily Primal while in the wildlands, I am
    unobstructed by undergrowth, and if I take a full move I may move
    three zones instead of two. Finally, tracking me in wildland areas
    is very difficult; those attempting it must overcome a difficulty
    equal to my **((Sneaky + Primal) \* 2)**.
-   **Barkskin Knack**: Because I have a minor magical knack, I can
    create advantage while Carefully Primal vs an Average (+1)
    difficulty to apply the Aspect **Barkskin** to myself. While this
    Aspect is active I gain +2 when defending against physical or
    damaging magical attacks. This Aspect may also be invoked to offer
    additional protection when defending from physical or magical harm.
    This Aspect can be overcome and removed as a Superb (+5) difficulty
    by those with Primal +3 or higher.
-   **Entangling Undergrowth**: Because I am a master of natural magics,
    when I am in a rural area with vegetation, while I am Carefully
    Primal I may attempt to overcome a Great (+4) difficulty to cause
    the undergrowth in my zone or an adjacent zone to animate and wrap
    itself around and entangle all targets. See the Entangling
    Undergrowth profile for details. I am immune to this effect.

:::description
###### Entangling Undergrowth

**Aspects**

-   Animated Undergrowth
-   Creeping Vines

**Good At**

-   Entangling (+5)

**Limitation**:

-   An immobile construct anchored to its zone.

**Hits**:

-   \[1\]\[1\]\[1\]\[1\]\[1\]
:::
:::

## Celestial Stunts

:::description
**Celestial Bane**: Because of my celestial nature, I inflict two (2)
extra shifts of damage when I physically attack devout followers of
malign deities.
:::

:::description
**Celestial Ray**: Because I have learned to channel my celestial
lineage into an attack, I gain +1 to attack while Flashy by projecting a
brightly glowing arc of energy at an opponent within two (2) zones of
me. I may also add my Divine Archetype (if any) as a bonus to my roll.
:::

:::description
**Mantle Of Celestial Power (-2)**: Because I am invested with celestial
power that empowers and protects me, I gain +1 while Flashy to defend
against attacks, and I may cast pure revealing light in all directions
from my person to brightly illuminate my zone.
:::

## Command Stunts

Stunts related to intimidating, frightening, or commanding others.

:::description
**Air Of Command**: Because I have an imperious air of command and aura
of authority, I gain +2 to create advantage or overcome during social
encounters when giving orders to sentient NPCs that lack consequences.
Additionally, even if such minions resist my commands, they will not
escalate the encounter to a conflict unless provoked and will call a
supervisor (if at all possible) rather than attempt to deal with me
themselves.
:::

:::description
**Armed Intimidation**: Because I am well armed and visibly dangerous, I
may add my Combative capability to create advantage or overcome when I
attempt to intimidate or assert control over a social situation if I am
armed appropriately.
:::

:::description
**Commanding Voice**: Because I am able to speak in a commanding voice
that compels obedience in those of lesser willpower; I may use Focused
for social interactions if I can talk, and I am resisted by Focused when
I do so. This is a mind-affecting effect.
:::

:::description
**Forbidding Presence**: Because I present a very intimidating and stern
visage while emanating a frightenting aura, I gain +1 when being Flashy
and attempting to frighten or demoralize.
:::

:::description
**Inspiring Leadership**: Because I inspire my allies and followers, any
allies who join me in battle gain +1 on all actions they take within a
conflict while being Combative. Allies must be within three (3) zones
and within line of sight of me to benefit from my leadership. This
ability applies for the duration of the conflict even if I am taken out,
as my allies are moved to protect or avenge me.
:::

:::description
**Rally Leader**: Because I am able to inspire my allies to regroup and
rally, once per scene I can give a motivating monologue or shout out
words of courage and valor to allow all allies within one (1) zone of me
to clear one of their stress boxes or a Mild consequence.
:::

:::description
**Terrifying Leadership**: Because I have terrified my minions into
obedience, they will not break while I am still alive no matter how dire
the situation gets.
:::

:::description
**Terrifying Roar**: Because I am able to make a terrifying noise, I
gain +1 when being Flashy and attempting to frighten or demoralize.
Alternately, once per scene if I move a zone and attack while Flashy I
may also attempt to create advantage to frighten or demoralize everyone
in the same zone as my target as a free action.
:::

## Competence Stunts

Stunts related to skill, proficiency, knacks, and sublime mastery of odd
abilities.

:::description
**Ambusher**: Because I am great at setting up ambushes, I gain +1 when
I Sneakily set up an ambush or create a related advantage.
:::

:::description
**Careful Aim**: Because I am skilled at aiming, I gain +1 when I
Carefully attack with a ranged weapon.
:::

:::description
**Close Call**: Because I excel at getting out of really bad situations,
I can spend a fate point to concede after I already rolled to defend
(normally a concession must be made instead of rolling to defend).
:::

:::description
**Dodgy**: Because I am good at getting out of the way of danger, I gain
+1 to defend when I am Quick.
:::

:::description
**Duelist**: Because I am skilled at the art of using weapons such as
thinblades, foils, rapiers, epees, sabres, and stilettos (i.e,
\'dueling\' weapons), I am a surprisingly effective combatant when armed
appropriately. Though my fighting style remains agile and even acrobatic
at times, when armed with an appropriate weapon I can use Focused in
place of Combatives in armed physical conflicts.
:::

:::description
**Dungeoneer**: Because I am a seasoned adventurer and dungeoneer, I
gain +2 when I am Clever and create advantage or overcome when a item of
common adventurer gear that I have proves to be useful.
:::

:::description
**Foe Bane**: Because I have a favored enemy Race, when I succesfully
attack a target of that Race I inflict +2 shifts of extra stress.
Additionally, if my attack results in a tie I may use the boost to
inflict a single point of stress on the defender, immediately, as a free
action.
:::

:::description
**Incorrigibly Competitive**: Because I am incorrigibly competitive and
driven to win, I gain +2 while Flashily Focused to create advantage or
overcome when engaged in any kind of one on one physical, mental, or
social contest, ranging from duels to drinking contests to arm wrestling
bouts to put-down matches to poker face offs and more.
:::

:::description
**Jack-of-all-Trades (-3)**: Because I am a jack of all trades who has
studied an array of different crafts, during a scene I may spend a fate
point as a free action to allow myself to use Focused as if it were any
one other Archetype for the remainder of the scene. I may activate this
ability multiple times per scene to use more than one Archetype,
spending an additional fate point each time.
:::

:::description
**Knife Fighter**: Because I am skilled with daggers of all shapes and
sizes, I may use Focused as if it were Combatives when fighting with one
or more daggers in a conflict, and I inflict +1 stress when I
successfully attack while doing so.
:::

:::description
**Making It Count**: Because I am able to make my attacks really matter,
on an attack that succeeds with style I may spend a fate point to
prevent the target from checking a stress box to reduce the stress of
the attack. The target may still take consequences.
:::

:::description
**Manhunter**: Because I am skilled at tracking a quary, I can use
Roguish instead of Primal when tracking a sentient humanoid in any
environment, and I gain +1 when I Roguishly overcome challenges when
doing so in an urban environment.
:::

:::description
**Morale Boosting Performance**: Because I am a naturally gifted
performer, I gain +2 when I am Flashily Focused and create subtle
advantages affecting morale or mental states, or help others overcome
challeges by motivating them, when I am able to make music. I can also
make long journeys less boring when stealth is not required, and make
some spare coin performing at taverns and such.
:::

:::description
**Nothing Succeeds Like Success (-3)**: Because nothing succeeds like
success, when I succeed with style and gain a boost I may upgrade that
boost to a situational Aspect on myself called **On A Roll!** with two
(2) invokes on it. If the Aspect is already active, I instead add two
(2) more free invokes to it. The Aspect is removed at the end of the
scene.
:::

:::description
**One Against Many**: Because I am skilled at defending myself against
multiple attackers, I gain +2 to defend when I fight alone against two
or more opponents. A single mook defined as a mob counts as being
multiple opponents for purposes of this ability as long as there are two
or more \'individuals\' within the mob. \'Fighting alone\' in this
context means no allies are in my zone or an adjacent zone, and no ally
is aiding me or attacking my opponents.
:::

:::description
**Raw Charisma**: Because I am naturally likeable and charismatic, I may
use Focused instead of Roguish for social interactions related to making
friends and influencing people. I gain +1 while Focused to create
advantage or overcome challenges when using this Stunt. However some
people innately distrust charming people, and I sometimes meet
unexpected friction to my overtures. When using this Stunt I can be
compelled by the GM to fail.
:::

:::description
**Riposte**: Because even my defense is dangerous, whenever I am
Flashily Focused and defend with style against a physical melee attack
while wielding a dueling weapon I may use the boost to inflict a single
point of stress on my attacker, immediately, as a free action.
:::

:::description
**Rogue\'s Reflexes**: Because I have great reflexes and am able to
evade harm better than most people, I may use Roguish to defend against
any kind of indirect or surprise attack and to avoid harm by getting out
of the way of it. Narratively this can take many forms, such as rolling
out of the way, ducking behind cover, \'seeing it coming\' and somehow
interupting the attack, or by some other means justified by the
narrative.

This Stunt requires Roguish +2 to use.

NOTE: Roguish +3 and higher already allows a character to do this. This
Stunt is for characters who have Roguish +2 and are willing to allocate
a Stunt to gain this ability.
:::

:::description
**Rural Warrior**: Because I am skilled at using practical, functional
weapons such as hunting spears and bows, woodsman axes, cudgels,
lariats, and weapons derived from farming equipment I am a surprisingly
effective combatant when armed appropriately. Though my fighting style
is no-frills and straightforward, when armed with an appropriate weapon
I can use Focused in place of Combatives in armed physical conflicts and
I gain +1 to create advantage attempts that utilize my unusual weaponry
in interesting ways.
:::

:::description
**Sublime Expertise (-2)**: Because I am extremely skilled and rarely
blunder, whenever I make a 4dF roll I treat any result of less than 0 as
-1.
:::

:::description
**Thrive Under Pressure**: Because I thrive under pressure, when I spend
a fate point to invoke one of my Aspects to gain a +2 bonus on an action
before I roll, if I succeed with style I get the fate point back
immediately instead of gaining a boost.
:::

:::description
**Trapsetter**: Because I am skilled at setting traps, as a non-action I
can spend a Fate point to create the situational Aspect **Trapped!** on
my zone or up to three (3) zones away with two (2) invokes. The Aspect
represents a trap I happened to have set up while no one was looking, or
a clever exploitation of the ambient scenery. My traps can take many
forms, limited only to things I can narratively justify. I can invoke
the Aspect to hinder someone in the affected zone or to help myself or
an ally acting against someone in the affected zone. The difficulty for
others to notice my trap before the first time it is invoked or to
overcome it is equal to my (Clever + Sneaky + Primal) traits if in a
wildlands area, otherwise it is equal to my (Clever + Sneaky + Roguish)
traits.
:::

:::description
**Tumbler**: Because I am excellent at acrobatically flipping around and
tumbling, if I am in a conflict and do nothing in an exchange except
move, I may move an additional zone and I am unobstructed by minor
obstacles that I can tumble around or flip over. If I am in a contest
involving me running away from something or avoiding capture, I gain +1
to overcome while I am Quick.
:::

:::description
**Staves Are Just So Useful**: Because I have learned to put my staff to
good use, I gain +1 when I am Careful and narratively describe how my
staff helps me. This can be used to aid me in my spell casting as well
as to fend off pesky attackers, or whatever fits the story.
:::

## Construct Stunts

Stunts detailing the capabilities of constructs such as golems and
automata.

:::description
**Constructed Resistances (-4)**: Because I am a construct I am immune
to death effects, disease, mental effects, paralysis, poison, sleep,
stun, and energy drain. I also don\'t need to breathe and never get
tired.
:::

:::description
**Constructed Senses (-2)**: Because I perceive the world via magical
sensors, I can see perfectly in total darkness, even if I am
\'blinded\'. Additionally, I can sense invisibile things that are near
me; I gain +2 while Focused to overcome any Aspect related to
invisibility or a similar effect within my zone.
:::

:::description
**Made Of Metal (-2)**: Because I am made of metal, I reduce by 2 all
stress inflicted on me by acid, cold, fire, force, and physical attacks.
However metal-affecting magics not only ignore this resistence, they
gain a +2 bonus when used against me.
:::

:::description
**Stony Flesh (-2)**: Because I am made of stone, I reduce by 2 all
stress inflicted on me by acid, cold, electricity, fire, and physical
attacks. However stone-affecting magics not only ignore this resistence,
they gain a +2 bonus when used against me.
:::

:::description
**Still As A Statue**: Because I am able to pose as an ornamental
statue, unmoving for as long as I care to be, I get +2 while I am Sneaky
and create advantage or overcome challenges to avoid notice if I am
immobile and posed appropriately. In most scenes, if I am already in an
area and posed appropriately I will already have the situational Aspect
**\'Just A Statue\'** on myself which I am assumed to have succeeded
with style to create and thus have two (2) invokes on it.
:::

## Construct Stunts

Stunts detailing the capabilities of constructs such as golems and
automata.

:::description
**Constructed Resistances (-4)**: Because I am a construct I am immune
to death effects, disease, mental effects, paralysis, poison, sleep,
stun, and energy drain. I also don\'t need to breathe and never get
tired.
:::

:::description
**Constructed Senses (-2)**: Because I perceive the world via magical
sensors, I can see perfectly in total darkness, even if I am
\'blinded\'. Additionally, I can sense invisibile things that are near
me; I gain +2 while Focused to overcome any Aspect related to
invisibility or a similar effect within my zone.
:::

:::description
**Made Of Metal (-2)**: Because I am made of metal, I reduce by 2 all
stress inflicted on me by acid, cold, fire, force, and physical attacks.
However metal-affecting magics not only ignore this resistence, they
gain a +2 bonus when used against me.
:::

:::description
**Stony Flesh (-2)**: Because I am made of stone, I reduce by 2 all
stress inflicted on me by acid, cold, electricity, fire, and physical
attacks. However stone-affecting magics not only ignore this resistence,
they gain a +2 bonus when used against me.
:::

:::description
**Still As A Statue**: Because I am able to pose as an ornamental
statue, unmoving for as long as I care to be, I get +2 while I am Sneaky
and create advantage or overcome challenges to avoid notice if I am
immobile and posed appropriately. In most scenes, if I am already in an
area and posed appropriately I will already have the situational Aspect
**\'Just A Statue\'** on myself which I am assumed to have succeeded
with style to create and thus have two (2) invokes on it.
:::

## Dastardly Stunts

Stunts related to low-down, underhanded, sneaky, roguish, dishonorable,
or illegal abilities.

:::description
**Back At You**: Because even my defense is dangerous, whenever I am
Quickly Roguish and defend with style against a physical melee attack
while wielding a light weapon I may use the boost to inflict a single
point of stress on my attacker, immediately, as a free action.
:::

:::description
**Bushwhacker**: Because I am great at setting up ambushes, I gain +1
when I Sneakily set up an ambush or create a related advantage.
:::

:::description
**Careful Crossbowman**: Because I am skilled with a crossbow, I gain +2
when I am Carefully Roguish and attack with a crossbow.
:::

:::description
**Cut And Run!**: Because I am excellent at getting away with it, if I
am in a conflict and do nothing in an exchange except move away from
danger, I may move two extra zones and I am unobstructed by urban
detritus and crowds. If I am in a contest involving me running away or
avoiding capture, I gain +2 to overcome while I am Quickly Roguish. This
ability only works in urban areas.
:::

:::description
**Dirty Infighter**: Because I am skilled at dirty tricks fighting and
getting inside my opponents\' guard to strike at vulnerable areas, I am
a surprisingly effective combatant. Though my fighting style remains
unconventional and evasive, when armed with daggers, light one handed
melee weapons such as short swords, garrottes, saps, makeshift weapons,
and similar armaments I can use Roguish to directly engage opponents who
are using Combative in armed physical conflicts.
:::

:::description
**Fast Attack!**: Because I am shockingly fast, I gain +1 when I am
Quickly Roguish and attack. If I inflict a consequence on my target I
get an *extra* free invoke on it.
:::

:::description
**Hip Shot**: Because I am skilled at rapidly shooting arrows, I gain +2
when I am Quickly Roguish and attack with a short bow or hand crossbow.
:::

:::description
**Mobile Strike**: Because I have a fast-moving agile fighting style,
whenever I am Quickly Roguish and attack, if I succeed with style and
choose to reduce the damage I inflict to get a boost I may use that
boost to immediately move 1 zone away, as a free action. If I also spend
a Fate point I may move an additional zone further away.
:::

:::description
**Pick Lock, Pocket, Or Number**: Because I am a thief without peer, I
gain +2 to overcome when I am Quickly Roguish and attempt to pick a lock
or a pocket, or to beat a combination or other form of complex lock.
:::

:::description
**Poison Master**: Because I am a master at using poisons and have built
up resistances to many of them over the years, I may use Roguish to
justify attack, defend, create advantage, and overcome actions whenever
poisons are relevent. Further, I tend to know or can usually find out
with little effort where poisons are bought and sold in urban centers.
:::

:::description
**Shiv**: Because I am skilled with daggers of all shapes and sizes, I
may use Roguish as if it were Combatives when fighting with one or more
daggers in a conflict, and I inflict +1 stress when I successfully
attack while doing so.
:::

:::description
**Skulker**: Because I am so good at escaping notice, I get +2 while I
am Sneakily Roguish and create advantage or overcome challenges to avoid
notice.
:::

:::description
**Sneak Attack**: Because I am good at looking unremarkable or going
unnoticed altogether only to launch a deadly and treacherous attack on
the unwary, I may add +4 when I am Sneakily Roguish and attack by
surprise. If I inflict a Mild or Moderate consequence on my opponent
with this attack I may spend a Fate point to bump the consequence from
Mild to Moderate or from Moderate to Severe.
:::

:::description
**Sudden Attack**: Because I am prone to sudden violence, I get +2 when
I Forcefully attack an opponent who is unaware of my intent.
:::

:::description
**Town And Country Sneaker**: Because I am so good at lurking and being
stealthy, I can use Roguish instead of Primal to create advantage and
overcome when attempting to avoid being noticed in rural and wildland
areas (Roguish is already usable for this in civilized areas).
:::

:::description
**Trap Sense**: Because I have preternaturally sharp senses and fast
reflexes, I gain +1 when I am Quickly Roguish and attempt to notice,
overcome, or defend against a trap.
:::

:::description
**Urban Opportunist**: Because I am so adept at taking advantage of
situational opportunities in civilized settlements, I gain +1 when I am
Roguish and create advantage or overcome to interact with the area or
scene while I am in typical urban areas.
:::

## Deific Stunts

Stunts that allow Divine characters to expand or specialize their
abilities, better model concepts found in the source material, or take
advantage of ideas presented in the [Simple Magic
Guidelines](#simple-magic-guidelines) and [Simple Magic
Options](#simple-magic-options).

:::description
**Destroy Undead**: Because I am particularly good at destroying lesser
undead, while Flashily Divine I may overcome to destroy an Undead mook
in my zone or an adjacent zone; the difficulty is equal to the number of
hits the mook has remaining. This does work on mobs of nameless Undead
mooks, but it does not work on significant NPC Undead that have
consequences.
:::

:::description
**Disrupt Undead**: When I am Forcefully Arcane and attack I may spend a
Fate point to target all Undead in my zone and all adjacent zones
without having to split my shifts between them.
:::

:::description
**Divine Aegis**: Because my patron deity protects me I may use Divine
to defend against non-Divine magical and unusual attacks without needing
to first create an advantage to invoke, unless I have recently done
something unworthy of my faith.
:::

:::description
**Divine Favor**: Because I am favored by my patron deity, I may add my
Divine capability as a bonus to defend against physical attacks, unless
I have recently done something unworthy of my faith.
:::

:::description
**Divine Judgment**: Because I am empowered by my deity to pronounce
judgments upon others, I gain +1 while Divine to create advantage to put
a spell Aspect on an opponent in my zone or an adjacent zone. Only I can
invoke this Aspect, and I may invoke it to improve my rolls against the
opponent or to impose a -2 penalty on rolls made by the opponent. This
ability uses the Simple Magic Guidelines for create advantage and
overcome. I may not use this ability if I have recently done something
unworthy of my faith.

Creating Advantage with magic is explained in the [Simple Magic
Guidelines](#simple-magic-guidelines).
:::

:::description
**Divine Renewal**: Because I am favored by my patron deity, when I am
Carefully Divine I may pray for aid to clear a stress box or a Mild
Consequence, or to downgrade a Moderate or Severe Consequence, by
overcoming a difficulty equal to the stress box\'s or Consequence\'s
numerical value. This only works on my own stress and Consequences, not
that of others. If I fail to overcome the difficulty I may not attempt
to clear the same stress box or heal the same Consequence again; I must
wait for it to clear by other means. I cannot use this ability if I have
recently done something unworthy of my faith
:::

:::description
**Divine Weapon (-2)**: Because I am favored by my patron deity, I have
been graced with a divinely empowered weapon. If I have recently done
something unworthy of my faith, the weapon loses its special abilities
until I have atoned.

:::description
###### Divine Weapon

**Aspects**

-   Divine Blade
-   Aura Of Protection

**Good At**

-   Blocking (+2)
-   Cutting (+2)

**Bad At**

-   Going Unnoticed (-2)

**Stress**:

-   \[1\]\[2\]\[3\]
-   Mild (2)

See \[Special Items\] for details.

This item requires Divine +2 or better to use.
:::
:::

:::description
**Favored Follower**: Because I am favored by my patron deity, once per
scene when I spend a fate point to get a reroll I may proceed as if I
had rolled +2 on the dice instead of rolling a second time. I may not
use this ability if I have recently done something unworthy of my faith.
:::

:::description
**Fervent Prayer**: Because my faith is strong, I am sometimes
especially blessed by my god. I may spend a Fate point to gain +2 Divine
on one (1) action and pray for blessings appropriate to that level of
Divine capability. I may not use this ability if I have recently done
something unworthy of my faith.
:::

:::description
**Holy Hand Grenades**: Because my patron favors me, I am able to craft
special reliquaries containing holy power that are released upon impact
when thrown, inflicting harm on evil outsiders, undead, and other
unnatural creatures nearby. I cannot use this ability if I have recently
done something unworthy of my faith.

When I am Quickly Focused I gain +1 to throw a holy hand grenade into my
zone or an adjacent zone, generally against an Average (+1) difficulty.

If I am successful, my holy hand grenade explodes and inflicts a number
of shifts of damage equal to my **(Careful + Divine)** against every
eligible target in the zone without splitting shifts between them.
Malign outsiders (such as demons, devils, daemons, and proteans),
undead, and other similar unnatural creatures are considered to be
eligible for this effect.

For a given session I can carry around and use a number of holy hand
grenades equal to my **(Careful + Divine)**. Other people can not use my
holy hand grenades.

This stunt requires Divine +1 or better to use.
:::

:::description
**Nature Priest**: Because I worship a nature deity I am in tune with
both divine and primal forces. When using Primal to work magic I may add
my Divine capability as a bonus.
:::

:::description
**Prepared Caster (Divine)**:

Because of my devotion to my patron deity, each morning I may
\'prepare\' a number of \'prayers\' equal to ((Careful + Flashy) \*
Divine).

To prepare a prayer I roll 4dF against a Mediocre (+0) difficulty,
adding a preparation bonus equal to double my Divine bonus.

I temporarily gain a new personal Aspect corresponding to the prayer I
prepared with **one invoke, and annotated with the margin of success**.

Later during the day I may \'cast\' a prepared prayer by invoking its
Aspect as an action and resolving the prayer using the previously rolled
margin of success.

It is possible for a prayer resolution to fail if the margin of success
is insufficient to the difficulty or if I am opposed successfully. I can
spend a Fate point at this time to add +2 shifts to the margin of
success.

Unfortunately due to my focus on prepared casting, I cannot free cast
anything other than simple divine effects known as orisons.

*Using Spell Write-ups*

If I am preparing a prayer from a write-up that indicates an Approach be
combined with Divine to cast the prayer, with language such as \'while
Flashily Divine\', I ignore the requirement and use my prepared bonus
instead.

If I am preparing a prayer from a write-up that states a particular
difficulty level, with language such as \'vs a Good (+3) difficulty)\',
the previously rolled margin of success is applied against the stated
difficulty when I \'cast\' it; any remaining shifts can be allocated per
the [Simple Magic Guidelines](#simple-magic-guidelines).
:::

:::description
**Shield of Faith**: Because I am favored by my patron deity, I may add
my Divine capability as a bonus to defend against indirect attacks such
as poisons and strange abilities and magic, unless I have recently done
something unworthy of my faith.
:::

:::description
**Smite**: Because I have been granted the ability to smite those who
stand against me by my patron deity, I gain +1 while Combative to strike
down a foe within my zone whose nature is anathemic to my patron deity;
further if my attack inflicts a consequence I gain an additional free
invoke on it.
:::

:::description
**Smite The Unworthy**: Because I am favored by my patron deity, when I
am being Combative I may add my Divine capability to attack opponents
who I know to be beyond redemption, unless I have recently done
something unworthy of my faith.
:::

:::description
**True Seeing**: Because my patron diety grants me awareness, my powers
of observation are divinely enhanced; I may use Divine instead of
Focused to notice or perceive things, and I can sense things that
require mystical awareness to detect.
:::

:::description
**Turn Undead**: When I am Divine and attack I may target all Undead in
my zone or in an adjacent zone without having to split my shifts between
them.
:::

:::description
**Turn Undead (-2)**: When I am Divine and attack I may target all
Undead in my zone and all adjacent zones without having to split my
shifts between them.
:::

:::description
**Vision of Madness**: Because I have been granted the ability to grant
others a chilling vision of madness by my patron deity, I gain +1 while
Divine to create advantage on a foe within my zone to place the
situational Aspect **Vision of Madness** upon them. The recipient may
invoke the Aspect to gain a bonus on any action that involves causing
damage or wreaking some kind of havoc or chaos, but each time they do
another free invoke is added that only an opponent can invoke. Each time
an opponent uses such an invoke, the recipient gets another free invoke.
This cycle can repeat itself any number of times. The Aspect lasts for a
scene but can be overcome by Divine magic as a Superb (+5) difficulty
challenge. The recipient themselves can also overcome the Aspect while
Carefully Focused as a Fantastic (+6) difficulty challenge.
:::

## Durability Stunts

Stunts related to toughness, recovering from injury, immunities, or
otherwise having unusual resilience.

:::description
**Damage Reduction**: Because I am more durable than normal, I reduce by
one (1) all stress inflicted on me by physical and magical attacks.
:::

:::description
**Fast Healing**: Because I heal extremely quickly, I reduce by 2 all
stress inflicted on me by physical and magical attacks. I appear to take
damage but it \'heals\' almost immediately in an impressive and
potentially intimidating display. However, this does not work versus
stress inflicted as damage by a specific reasonably common kind of
attack and in fact I take +1 shift of stress from such attacks.
:::

:::description
**Focused Resistance**: Because my innate fortitude and intrinsic
vitality protects me, I may use Focused to defend against magical and
unusual attacks without needing special narrative justification or first
creating an advantage to invoke.
:::

:::description
**Fueled By Suffering**: Because I channel my pain and suffering and
become more dangerous when I am in danger, when I take stress or
consequences from attacks I gain a Boost called **Fueled By Suffering**.
:::

:::description
**Immune To Acid**: Because I am immune to acid, I take no ill effect
from any attack that relies on acid.
:::

:::description
**Immune To Cold**: Because I am immune to cold, I am unaffected by any
malign effect that relies on cold.
:::

:::description
**Immune To Electricity**: Because I am immune to electricity, I am
unaffected by any malign effect that relies on electricity.
:::

:::description
**Immune To Fire**: Because I am immune to fire, I am unaffected by any
malign effect that relies on fire.
:::

:::description
**Immune To Magic (-2)**: Because I am immune to almost all magic, I am
unaffected by any malign effect that relies on magic.
:::

:::description
**Immune To Mind-Affecting**: Because I am immune to mind-affecting
abilities, I am unaffected by any malign effect that relies on mental
coersion or disorientation.
:::

:::description
**Immune To Poison**: Because I am immune to poison, I am unaffected by
any malign effect that relies on poison.
:::

:::description
**Just Roll With It**: Because I excel at avoiding harm and rolling with
whatever comes my way, I can use more than one stress box to absorb
stress from an attack (normally, only one stress box may be used to
offset stress from a single attack).
:::

:::description
**No Flesh To Harm (-3)**: Because I have no soft tissue, I gain +4 to
defend against attacks that cut, stab, poison, burn, or otherwise deal
damage by harming flesh.
:::

:::description
**Push Beyond The Edge**: Because I fight to the bitter end no matter
what the cost, at any time as a non action if my Severe consequence is
currently clear I may choose to either worsen my Moderate consequence
(if any) to a Severe consequence or take a new Severe consequence
**Pushed Myself Too Far** to clear my Mild Consequences and all my
Stress boxes.
:::

:::description
**Resilience**: Because of my impressive resilience, once per session if
I would take a Consequence I may instead spend a Fate point.
:::

:::description
**Stalwart Resistance**: Because my innate fortitude and intrinsic
vitality protects me, I gain +1 to defend against magical and unusual
attacks without needing special narrative justification or first
creating an advantage to invoke.
:::

:::description
**Tough Hide**: Because I have a tough hide I reduce by one (1) all
stress inflicted on me as damage by physical attacks, and when I defend
against physical melee attacks and tie my opponent does not get a boost.
:::

## Elemental Stunts

Stunts strongly related to beings of the Elemental Planes, those
descended from them, or having a strong elemental affinity.

:::description
**Aeromancer**: Because I have mastered the ancient magics of the
Element of Air, I may combine my Arcane and Primal Archetypes when I am
casting spells related to air, wind, lighting, weather, and so forth.
:::

:::description
**Air Walk**: Because of my elemental affinity, I may walk upon the air
as if I weighed no more than a feather. I am never harmed or unduly
inconvenienced by falling, even if I am unconscious. However this effect
is temporarily cancelled if I am encumbered or anchored by more than
half my own body weight.
:::

:::description
**Blade Of Fire (-3)**: Because of my elemental affinity I can conjure a
flaming magical sword at will; I gain +1 to attack and defend and can
use Primal in place of Combatives while wielding it. If I get a boost
while attacking or defending with it, I may upgrade the boost to apply
the Aspect **On Fire!** with two (2) invokes on it to the opponent I am
engaged with.
:::

:::description
**Control Water**: Because I am skilled at controlling and manipulating
water with my magics, I gain +1 while I am Cleverly Arcane and attack,
defend, create advantage, or overcome when I can make a reasonable
volume of water relevant to the narrative.
:::

:::description
**Enervating Cold**: Because I am able to drain the life energy from
others with intense cold, if I inflict a Consequence on a target with
cold or ice based magics I afflict them with enervation and ennui.
Consequences such as **Easily Fatigued**, **Frostbitten**,
**Debilitating Shivers**, and **Cold Stiffened Limbs** cause those
afflicted to struggle to take even basic physical and mental actions,
struggle against cold-numbness, and so forth.
:::

:::description
**Fast Swimmer**: Because I am a fast swimmer, I may move an extra zone
for free when swimming and this does not prevent me from attacking.
Alternately, if I do nothing but move while swimming I may use this
ability to move two (2) extra zones.
:::

:::description
**Firebreath (-3)**: Because I am able to expel a cone of burning flame
from my mouth, I gain +2 to make a special flaming breath attack
affecting all targets in my zone without having to split my shifts
between them. This attack is non-discriminatory, and often causes
collateral damage.
:::

:::description
**Flame Blade Mastery**: Because I have mastered the Primal magic
ability to conjure and fight with a blade of flame, I gain +1 and may
use Primal in place of Combative when using a flame blade spell Aspect
to attack or defend. I must first create the spell Aspect (using the
simple magic system) to use this ability, however.
:::

:::description
**Freezing Bolt**: Because I can offensively focus blistering coldness,
I gain +1 to attack while Flashily Arcane by projecting a ray of
freezing cold air and ice shards at an opponent within two (2) zones of
me. If I get a boost, it is automatically upgraded to the Aspect
**Numbed By Cold** with two (2) invokes on it. This aspect can be
overcome as a Great (+4) challenge.
:::

:::description
**Geomancer**: Because I have mastered the ancient magics of the Element
of Earth, I may combine my Arcane and Primal Archetypes when I am
casting spells related to earth, rock, seismic vibrations, and so forth.
:::

:::description
**Hammer Of Stone (-3)**: Because of my elemental affinity I can conjure
a fearsome stone hammer at will; I gain +1 to attack and defend and can
use Primal in place of Combatives while wielding it. If I get a boost
while attacking or defending with it, I may upgrade the boost to apply
the Aspect **Stunned!** with two (2) invokes on it to the opponent I am
engaged with.
:::

:::description
**Hydromancer**: Because I have mastered the ancient magics of the
Element of Water, I may combine my Arcane and Primal Archetypes when I
am casting spells related to water, precipitation, steam, mist, liquids,
and so forth.
:::

:::description
**Icy Shield**: Because I am able to create a shield of hardened ice to
protect myself, I gain +2 to defend against physical and elemental
attacks while Quick if I am aware of the attack and able to move. This
ability does not work in hot and dry environments.
:::

:::description
**Immune To Acid**: Because I am immune to acid, I am unaffected by any
malign effect that relies on acid.
:::

:::description
**Immune To Cold**: Because I am immune to cold, I am unaffected by any
malign effect that relies on cold.
:::

:::description
**Immune To Electricity**: Because I am immune to electricity, I am
unaffected by any malign effect that relies on electricity.
:::

:::description
**Immune To Fire**: Because I am immune to fire, I am unaffected by any
malign effect that relies on fire.
:::

:::description
**Lightning Arc**: Because of my elemental affinity I am able to project
an arc of electricity that jumps from target to target, when I am
Flashily Primal and attack I may spend a Fate point to affect all enemy
targets in my zone without having to split my shifts between them.
:::

:::description
**Lightning Master**: Because I have mastered the manipulation of
lightning, I gain +2 while I am Flashily Primal and attack using
lightning effects.
:::

:::description
**Lightning Storm (-3)**: Because of my elemental affinity I am able to
project an arc of electricity that jumps from target to target, each
exchange when I am Flashily Primal and attack I may affect all enemy
targets in my zone or an adjacent zone without having to split my shifts
between them.
:::

:::description
**Pyromancer**: Because I have mastered the ancient magics of the
Element of Fire, I may combine my Arcane and Primal Archetypes when I am
casting spells related to fire, heat, combustion, and so forth.
:::

:::description
**Stoney Skin**: Because of my elemental affinity I am able to protect
myself with a stoney skin that shields me from damage, I reduce by one
(1) all stress inflicted on me by physical and magical attacks.
:::

:::description
**Summon Air Elemental (-3)**: Because of my elemental affinity, once
per session as an action I can summon a air elemental and command it to
serve me for a scene. See the Air Elemental profile for details.

:::description
###### Medium Air Elemental

**Summoning Difficulty**

-   +12

**Aspects**

-   Elemental Air
-   Fly Like The Wind

**Good At**

-   Moving Air (+4)

**Bad At**

-   Sentience (-2)
-   Resisting Vacuum (-2)

**Stress**

-   \[1\]\[2\]\[3\]
-   Mild (2)
-   Moderate (4)

Do not treat as a mob.

This cloud-like creature has dark hollows reminiscent of eyes and a
mouth, and a howling wind whips it into ominous shapes. Moving like a
cyclone, and able to expand and contract itself rapidly at will, this
elemental is fast and dangerous.

Note that the \'Moving Air\' ability bonus applies to any sort of action
that involves air, requiring only narrative justification.

**Stunts**

-   **Immune To Electricity**: Because I am immune to electricity, I am
    unaffected by any malign effect that relies on electricity.
-   **Fast Flyer**: Because I am able to fly very fast, if I do nothing
    but move while flying I may use this ability to move four zones
    instead of two.
-   **Lightning Storm (-3)**: Because of my elemental affinity I am able
    to project an arc of electricity that jumps from target to target.
    Each exchange I gain +4 to attack all enemy targets in my zone or an
    adjacent zone without having to split my shifts between them.
-   **Mundane Reduction**: Because I am extremely resistent to
    non-magical damage, I reduce by two (2) all stress inflicted on me
    by normal mundane weapons and attacks.
:::
:::

:::description
**Summon Earth Elemental (-3)**: Because of my elemental affinity, once
per session as an action I can summon a earth elemental and command it
to serve me for a scene. See the Earth Elemental profile for details.

:::description
###### Medium Earth Elemental

**Summoning Difficulty**

-   +12

**Aspects**

-   Elemental Earth
-   Move Through The Ground

**Good At**

-   Brickishness (+4)

**Bad At**

-   Sentience (-2)
-   Resisting Water (-2)

**Stress**

-   \[1\]\[2\]\[3\]
-   Mild (2)
-   Moderate (4)

Do not treat as a mob.

This hulking, roughly humanoid creature of dirt and stone explodes up
from the earth, faceless save for two glowing gemstone eyes.

Note that Brickishness applies to any action related to being big,
strong, and durable.

**Stunts**

-   **Immune To Acid**: Because I am immune to acid, I am unaffected by
    any malign effect that relies on acid.
-   **Stoney Slam (-3)**: Because I\'m able to slam and bash things with
    my body made of stone; I gain +1 to attack while being Brickish. If
    I get a boost while attacking, I may upgrade the boost to knock my
    target down in the current zone or back into an adjacent zone, and
    also apply the Aspect **Slammed!** with three (3) free invokes on
    it. The target cannot attack, create advantage, or move more than
    one (1) zone until the Aspect is removed; it may be overcome as a
    Good (+3) difficulty and failed attempts to overcome remove an
    invoke.
-   **Stoney Skin**: Because of my elemental affinity I am able to
    protect myself with a stoney skin that shields me from damage, I
    reduce by one (1) all stress inflicted on me by physical and magical
    attacks.
-   **Mundane Reduction**: Because I am extremely resistent to
    non-magical damage, I reduce by two (2) all stress inflicted on me
    by normal mundane weapons and attacks.
:::
:::

:::description
**Summon Fire Elemental (-3)**: Because of my elemental affinity, once
per session as an action I can summon a fire elemental and command it to
serve me for a scene. See the Fire Elemental profile for details.

:::description
###### Medium Fire Elemental

**Summoning Difficulty**

-   +12

**Aspects**

-   Elemental Fire
-   Burn It All Up!

**Good At**

-   Burning (+5)

**Bad At**

-   Sentience (-2)
-   Resisting Water and Cold (-2)

**Stress**:

-   \[1\]\[2\]\[3\]

-   Mild (2)
-   Moderate (4)

Do not treat as a mob.

This creature looks like a living, mobile bonfire, tongues of flame
reaching out in search of things to burn.

Note that Burning applies to any action where fire is relevant.

**Stunts**

-   **Immune To Fire**: Because I am immune to fire, I am unaffected by
    any malign effect that relies on fire.
-   **Made Of Fire (-3)**: Because I am made of fire; I gain +1 to
    attack and defend while Burning. If I get a boost while attacking or
    defending in this way, I may upgrade the boost to apply the Aspect
    **On Fire!** with three (3) free invokes on it to the opponent I am
    engaged with. This Aspect is automatically invoked at the beginning
    of each exchange to inflict 2 stress on the victim. It is a Good
    (+3) difficulty to overcome this Aspect.
-   **Mundane Reduction**: Because I am extremely resistent to
    non-magical damage, I reduce by two (2) all stress inflicted on me
    by normal mundane weapons and attacks.
:::
:::

:::description
**Summon Fire Elemental**: Because of my elemental affinity, as an
action I can summon a small fire elemental and command it to serve me
for a scene. See the Small Fire Elemental profile for details. I cannot
move in the same exchange that I use this ability.

:::description
###### Small Fire Elemental

**Summoning Difficulty**

-   +5

**Aspect**

-   Elemental Fire
-   Burn It All Up!

**Good At**

-   Burning (+3)

**Bad At**

-   Sentience (-2)
-   Resisting Water and Cold (-2)

**Hits**:

-   \[1\]\[1\] 

Up to five (5) small elementals can form a mob. Add two (2) stress per
elemental. +1 to attack and create advantage for every additional
remaining elemental.

Note that Burning applies to any action where fire is relevant.

**Stunts**

-   **Immune To Fire**: Because I am immune to fire, I am unaffected by
    any malign effect that relies on fire.
-   **Made Of Fire (-3)**: Because I am made of fire; I gain +1 to
    attack and defend while Burning. If I get a boost while attacking or
    defending in this way, I may upgrade the boost to apply the Aspect
    **On Fire!** with three (3) free invokes on it to the opponent I am
    engaged with. This Aspect is automatically invoked at the beginning
    of each exchange to inflict 2 stress on the victim. It is a Good
    (+3) difficulty to overcome this Aspect.
-   **Mundane Reduction**: Because I am extremely resistent to
    non-magical damage, I reduce by two (2) all stress inflicted on me
    by normal mundane weapons and attacks.
:::
:::

:::description
**Summon Water Elemental (-3)**: Because of my elemental affinity, once
per session as an action I can summon a water elemental and command it
to serve me for a scene. See the Water Elemental profile for details.

:::description
###### Medium Water Elemental

**Summoning Difficulty**

-   +12

**Aspects**

-   Elemental Water
-   Sublime Swimmer

**Good At**

-   Moving Water (+4)

**Bad At**

-   Sentience (-2)
-   Resisting Heat & Fire (-2)

**Stress**:

-   \[1\]\[2\]\[3\]
-   Mild (2)
-   Moderate (4)

Do not treat as a mob.

This translucent creature\'s shape shifts between a spinning column of
water and a crashing wave.

Note that the \'Moving Water\' ability bonus applies to any sort of
action that involves water, requiring only narrative justification.

**Stunts**

-   **Immune To Cold**: Because I am immune to cold, I am unaffected by
    any malign effect that relies on cold.
-   **Fast Swimmer**: Because I am a fast swimmer, I may move an extra
    zone for free when swimming and this does not prevent me from
    attacking. Alternately, if I do nothing but move while swimming I
    may use this ability to move two (2) extra zones.
-   **Watery Slam (-2)**: Because I\'m able to slam and submerge things
    with large quantities of water; if I get a boost while attacking
    while Moving Water, I may upgrade the boost to knock my target down
    in the current zone or back into an adjacent zone, and also apply
    the Aspect **Waterlogged!** with two (2) invokes on it. The target
    cannot attack, create advantage, or move more than one (1) zone
    until the Aspect is removed; it may be overcome as a Good (+3)
    difficulty and failed attempts to overcome remove an invoke.
-   **Summon Water Elemental**: Because of my elemental affinity, as an
    action I can summon a small water elemental and command it to serve
    me for a scene. See the Small Water Elemental profile for details. I
    cannot move in the same exchange that I use this ability.
-   **Mundane Reduction**: Because I am extremely resistent to
    non-magical damage, I reduce by two (2) all stress inflicted on me
    by normal mundane weapons and attacks.
:::
:::

:::description
**Summon Water Elemental**: Because of my elemental affinity, as an
action I can summon a small water elemental and command it to serve me
for a scene. See the Small Water Elemental profile for details. I cannot
move in the same exchange that I use this ability.

:::description
###### Small Water Elemental

**Summoning Difficulty**

-   +5

**Aspects**

-   Elemental Water
-   Sublime Swimmer

**Good At**

-   Moving Water (+3)

**Bad At**

-   Sentience (-2)
-   Resisting Heat & Fire (-2)

**Hits**:

-   \[1\]\[1\]

Up to five (5) small elementals can form a mob. Add two (2) stress per
elemental. +1 to create advantage and attack for every additional
remaining elemental.

Note that the \'Moving Water\' ability bonus applies to any sort of
action that involves water, requiring only narrative justification.

**Stunts**

-   **Immune To Cold**: Because I am immune to cold, I am unaffected by
    any malign effect that relies on cold.
-   **Fast Swimmer**: Because I am a fast swimmer, I may move an extra
    zone for free when swimming and this does not prevent me from
    attacking. Alternately, if I do nothing but move while swimming I
    may use this ability to move two (2) extra zones.
-   **Watery Slam (-2)**: Because I\'m able to slam and submerge things
    with large quantities of water; if I get a boost while attacking
    while Moving Water, I may upgrade the boost to knock my target down
    in the current zone or back into an adjacent zone, and also apply
    the Aspect **Waterlogged!** with two (2) invokes on it. The target
    cannot attack, create advantage, or move more than one (1) zone
    until the Aspect is removed; it may be overcome as a Good (+3)
    difficulty and failed attempts to overcome remove an invoke.
-   **Mundane Reduction**: Because I am extremely resistent to
    non-magical damage, I reduce by two (2) all stress inflicted on me
    by normal mundane weapons and attacks.
-   **Water Breather**: Because I am able to breath underwater and I am
    comfortable when in aquatic environments, I am able to breath
    underwater indefinitely even if unconscious and I gain +1 to create
    advantage and overcome while in the water.
:::
:::

## Filth Stunts

Stunts related to disease, venomous bites, and other verminous or
pestilential traits.

:::description
**Diseased Bite**: Because I can infect those I bite with a disease, if
I bite someone and inflict a Moderate consequence, I can force it to be
called **Got The Shakes!** or **Filth Fever!**. If I instead inflict a
Severe consequence, I can force it to be called **Red Ache!** or
**Leprosy!**. The same person can only be affected by this ability once
per scene.
:::

:::description
**Disease Ridden (-2)**: Because I am riddled with diseases and
parasites, those who come into physical contact with me have a chance to
become infected. If someone who has made physical contact with me takes
a Moderate consequence in the same scene, I can force it to be called
**Got The Shakes!** or **Filth Fever!**. If someone who has made
physical contact with me takes a Severe consequence in the same scene, I
can force it to be called **Red Ache!** or **Leprosy!**. The same person
can only be affected by this ability once per scene.
:::

:::description
**Poisoned Bite**: Because I have a poisonous bite, once per conflict I
may gain +4 while Quickly Focused to create the advantage **Poisoned**
on a target within my zone.
:::

:::description
**Poisoned Sting**: Because I have a poisonous sting, once per conflict
I may gain +4 while Quickly Focused to create the advantage **Poisoned**
on a target within my zone.
:::

## Fitness Stunts

Stunts related to running fast, being strong, raw athleticism, and
fisticuffs.

:::description
**Brawler**: Because I am so strong, I get +2 while I am Forcefully
Focused and attack when fighting unarmed or grappling or when throwing
heavy blunt things.
:::

:::description
**I Am A Living Weapon**: Because I have honed my body and my skills, my
unarmed strikes are equivalent to lethal weapons. I may use Focused
instead of Combative when fighting unarmed without any special narrative
justification or penalty. In situations where it matters I can choose to
be treated as attacking barehanded or attacking with a weapon, whichever
benefits me more in the situation. Finally, though I can be
inconvenienced or restrained, being disarmed is generally off the table
for me.
:::

:::description
**Impressive Reflexes**: Because I have excellent reflexes, I gain +1
while Quickly attacking.
:::

:::description
**Indomitable Brawler**: Because I am so tough, I get +2 while I am
Forcefully Focused and defend when fighting unarmed or grappling.
:::

:::description
**Passing Attack**: Because I have a fast-moving agile fighting style,
whenever I am Quick and attack, if I choose to reduce the damage I
inflict to get a boost I may use that boost to immediately move one (1)
zone away as a free action. If I also spend a Fate point I may move an
additional zone further away.
:::

:::description
**Sprinter**: Because I am able to put on a little extra burst of speed
when I need to, once per scene whenever I move a zone I may choose to
immediately move another zone for free and this does not prevent me from
attacking. Alternately, if I do nothing but move I may use this ability
to move two (2) extra zones.
:::

:::description
**Strider**: Because I am fleet of foot and able to move quickly, if I
am in a conflict and do nothing in an exchange except move, I may move
an extra zone and I am unobstructed by foot hazards of less than knee
height. If I am in a contest involving me walking rapidly or running, I
gain +1 to overcome while I am Quick.
:::

:::description
**Stunning Fist**: Because I have learned how to throw a vicious punch,
whenever I am Forcefully Focused and attack barehanded, if I succeed
with style and choose to reduce the damage I inflict to get a boost I
may use that boost to apply the situational Aspect **Stunned!** to my
target with two (2) invokes. The target can remove this Aspect by
overcoming a Superb (+5) difficulty.
:::

:::description
**Thunderous Jab**: Because I have learned how to throw a vicious punch,
whenever I am Quickly Focused and attack barehanded, if I succeed with
style and choose to reduce the damage I inflict to get a boost I may use
that boost to apply the situational Aspect **Staggered!** to my target
with two (2) invokes. The target can remove this Aspect by overcoming a
Superb (+5) difficulty.
:::

:::description
**Very Strong**: Because I am so strong, I get +2 while I am Forcefully
Focused and create advantage or overcome when my great strength is a
factor.
:::

## Flying Stunts

Stunts related to flying, dive bombing, and so on.

:::description
**Dive Bomber**: Because I am good at using my natural flight and great
mass to execute murderous fly-bys and dive bombs, I gain +2 to attack a
target in my zone while Forcefully Focused when I am flying and swoop or
dive down within striking range of my target.
:::

:::description
**Fast Flyer**: Because I am able to fly very fast, if I do nothing but
move while flying I may use this ability to move four zones instead of
two.
:::

:::description
**Fly By**: Because I am able to swoop in at speed, when I am flying I
may move an extra zone and attack, or move 1 zone and attack and then
immediately move 1 more zone away. When I use this ability I must move
in a more or less straight line, but I can gain and lose altitude along
my path.
:::

:::description
**Windrider**: Because I have mastered the art of riding the winds, I
can spend a Fate point to fly for the duration of a scene and
potentially longer. While flying I may move 1 additional zone per
exchange and I ignore any ground based obstacles I can fly over.
However, while I am flying in this fashion I must move at least 1 zone
each exchange and I can\'t go backwards. If I can\'t move forward (in
approx a 120 degree arc) I must land, ending the effect.
:::

## Hindrance Stunts

Flaws, drawbacks, complications, and so on.

Unlike normal Stunts which deplete a character\'s Refresh, characters
gain one or more Refresh from a Hindrance\...but only for offsetting the
Refresh equivalence of other Stunts.

For example, a character with three Stunts and a Hindrance gains no
mechanical benefit as characters normally start with three free Stunt
slots. However a character with four Stunts and a Hindrance that is
worth +1 Refresh equivalence would not have to reduce their Refresh for
the fourth Stunt as the Hindrance has offset its impact.

:::description
**Abomination (+1)**: Because I am a foul abomination, postive energy
inflicts two (2) extra shifts of stress against me, and I take stress
from healing magics instead of being healed.
:::

:::description
**Physically Weak (+2)**: Because I am physically very weak, I suffer -4
to all 4dF resolutions that involve lifting or moving physical objects
or applying physical force.
:::

:::description
**Socially Inept (+1)**: Because I can\'t seem to work or play well with
others even when I try to do so, I am very difficult to get along with
and struggle in social situations. When I would roll 4dF for an action
related to social interaction I instead roll 6dF and choose four (4)
worst dice for my result.
:::

:::description
**Vulnerable To Heat and Flames (+1)**: Because I am vulnerable to heat
and flames, I suffer one (1) additional stress∆ from all heat or fire
based attacks.
:::

:::description
**Vulnerability To Sunlight (+1)**: \[Because I am vulnerable to bright
light, I suffer -1 to all 4dF resolutions while exposed to sunlight or
other intense light. If exposed to sunlight for more than an hour, my
\[1\] stress box is considered to be checked at all times; I recover
from this after being in darkness for at least an hour.
:::

## Infernal Stunts

Stunts strongly related to beings of the Hells or those descended from
them, such as diabolical devils.

:::description
**Blade Of Infernal Flame (-3)**: Because of my infernal nature I can
conjure a flaming magical blade at will; I gain +1 to attack and defend
and can use Arcane in place of Combatives while wielding it. If I get a
boost while attacking or defending with it, I may upgrade the boost to
apply the Aspect **Infernal Agony** with two (2) invokes on it to the
opponent I am engaged with.
:::

:::description
**Breath Of Infernal Flame (-2)**: Because of my infernal nature twice
per conflict I may breathe a cone of fire, gaining +2 to attack one or
more targets in my zone and one adjacent zone. If I split my shifts
between multiple targets each target suffers a -2 penalty to defend
against this attack.
:::

:::description
**Diabolic Agony**: Because I have learned to project intense pain into
the minds of others, I gain +1 to attack while Cleverly Focused by
intensely concentrating upon an opponent in my zone or an adjacent zone.
If I get a boost it is automatically upgraded to the situational Aspect
**Debilitating Pain** with two (2) invokes. This Aspect can be removed
as a Great (+4) challenge. This is a mind-affecting effect.
:::

:::description
**Diabolic Bane**: Because of my diabolic nature, I inflict two (2)
extra shifts of damage when I physically attack devout followers of
benign deities.
:::

:::description
**Diabolic Bolt**: Because I have learned to channel my diabolic lineage
into my magic, I gain +1 to attack while Cleverly Arcane by projecting
an ominously glowing arc of energy at an opponent within four (4) zones
of me.
:::

:::description
**Diabolic Durability**: Because my infernal nature makes me much more
durable than normal, I reduce by two (2) all stress inflicted on me by
physical attacks. However this does not work against magic, cold iron,
or weapons blessed by a benign deity.
:::

:::description
**Diabolic Immunity (-3)**: Because of my infernal nature, I am immune
to electricity, fire, disease, and poison. However, positive energy
inflicts two (2) extra shifts of stress against me.
:::

:::description
**Diabolic Teleportation**: Because I inherited the ability to teleport
(though not effortlessly), once per session as an action I can remove
myself from the scene by teleporting myself elsewhere. My range is
limited to somewhere within approximately fifty (50) miles of my current
location.
:::

:::description
**Diabolic Teleportation (-2)**: Because of my fiendish nature I am able
to teleport myself. Once per scene as an action I can remove myself from
the scene by teleporting elsewhere. My range is limited to somewhere
within approximately five hundred (500) miles of my current location.
:::

:::description
**Infernal Lineage**: Because I am born of a bloodline with infernal
lineage, I gain +2 when I am Cleverly Arcane and casting spells related
to fire, coersion, and diabolism.
:::

:::description
**Mantle Of Infernal Power (-2)**: Because I am invested with infernal
power that empowers and protects me, I gain +2 when Clever to create
advantage and overcome in social encounters when I can bring my sharp
wits to bear. Additionally I gain +1 to defend while Arcane.
:::

## Innate Stunts

Stunts related to inborn, intrinsic abilities and knacks.

:::description
**Alertness**: Because I am unusually alert and perceptive I gain +2
while Focused to notice things.
:::

:::description
**Amphibious Swimmer**: Because I am amphibious, I may add my Primal
capability bonus when I am Focused while swimming. Additionally, while
swimming underwater I can hold my breath for an entire scene before
having to come up for air.
:::

:::description
**Blind Sense**: Because I have unusual senses that do not rely upon
sight I can sense invisibile things that are near me; I gain +2 while
Focused to overcome any Aspect related to invisibility or a similar
effect within my zone or an adjacent zone.
:::

:::description
**Danger Sense**: Because I am unusually alert and perceptive I gain +3
while Quickly Focused to notice things that are dangerous, fast moving,
or pose an imminent threat to my safety.
:::

:::description
**Darkvision**: Because I have Darkvision I can see perfectly in total
darkness.
:::

:::description
**Fast Swimmer**: Because I am a fast swimmer, I may move an extra zone
for free when swimming and this does not prevent me from attacking.
Alternately, if I do nothing but move while swimming I may use this
ability to move two (2) extra zones.
:::

:::description
**Naturally Sneaky**: Because I am innately good at being sneaky, I may
use Focused instead of Roguish or Primal when Sneakily attempting to
avoid notice. However, I suffer a -1 penalty when I do so.
:::

:::description
**Naturally Sneaky (-2)**: Because I am innately good at being sneaky, I
may use Focused instead of Roguish or Primal when Sneakily attempting to
avoid notice.
:::

:::description
**Natural Weapons**: Because I have natural weapons and am skilled in
their use, I may use Focused instead of Combative when my natural
weapons are relevant. In situations where it matters I can choose to be
treated as attacking barehanded or attacking with a weapon, whichever
benefits me more in the situation. Finally, though I can be
inconvenienced and my natural weapons can be fouled or restrained, being
disarmed is generally off the table for me.
:::

:::description
**Plant Traits**: Because of my verdant nature, I am immune to
mind-affecting effects (charms, compulsions, morale effects, patterns,
and phantasms), paralysis, poison, polymorph, sleep, and stun. However I
take +1 shift of stress from attacks that rely on cold, fire, acid, or
are described as being especially effective vs plant life.
:::

:::description
**Trapfinder**: Because I have an almost preternatural knack for
noticing and avoiding traps, I am rarely surprised by a trap. I gain +1
on any attempt to notice, defend against, or overcome a trap.
:::

:::description
**Unusual Senses**: Because I a have unusual senses I gain +1 while
Focused to notice things, and I can sense things that are not detectable
by normal senses.
:::

:::description
**Water Breather**: Because I am able to breath underwater and I am
comfortable when in aquatic environments, I am able to breath underwater
indefinitely even if unconscious and I gain +1 to create advantage and
overcome while in the water.
:::

## Lineage Stunts

\[Stunts strongly related to a specific lineages, stereotypical racial
abilities, and so forth\]{\#sitemap}.

:::description
**Abyssal Lineage**: Because I am born of a bloodline with abyssal
lineage, I gain +2 when I am Flashily Arcane and casting spells related
to fire, darkness, and demonology.
:::

:::description
**Aristocrat**: Because I am the heir to an aristocratic line with
history entangled with a nation state, ruling dynasty, or region I am
afforded respect, deference, and access to those in power far exceeding
anything justified by my own merit. The benefit of this is tied to the
political influence and power of whatever land or people my lineage is
attached to and in some situations can even be a compellable hindrance;
GM\'s discretion applies.
:::

:::description
**Breath Weapon (-2)**: Because I am able to expel a specific kind of
breath attack from my mouth, once per scene I may make a special attack
affecting all targets (animate and inanimate) in my zone without having
to split my shifts between them. In addition to inflicting stress, I can
also re-use the results of my attack roll to attempt to overcome or
alter a single situtational aspect present in the affected zone if I can
narratively justify it; for instance I could overcome an obstruction by
destroying it. This attack is non-discriminatory and often causes
collateral damage at the GM\'s discretion, such as modifying ambient
descriptors within the affected zone to reflect a damaged or ruined
state; for instance a **Fancy Hotel Room** descriptor aspect might be
altered to instead be **Scorched Hotel Room**.
:::

:::description
**Dwarven Resilience**: Because I am attuned to my Dwarven nature, once
per session if I would take a Consequence I may instead spend a Fate
point to avoid it. When I do this I also get a free invoke on my Dwarf
Race Aspect.
:::

:::description
**Dwarf Stubborn**: Because I am stubborn even for a Dwarf, I gain +2
when I am Focused and defend against attempts to coerce, convince,
magically compel, or trick me into doing something I don\'t want to do.
:::

:::Description **Elven Grace**: Because I am attuned to my Elven nature,
once per session I may take a single free reroll on one of my own 4dF
rolls or force an opponent in my current scene to reroll one of their
4dF rolls. When I do this I also get a free invoke on my Elf Race
Aspect.
:::

:::description
**Halfling Fortune**: Because I am attuned to my Halfling nature, once
per session when attempting an action I can narratively justify and have
even a small chance of succeeding at, I may spend a Fate point to
automatically succeed rather than attempt a 4dF resolution. When I do
this I also get a free invoke on my Halfling Race Aspect.
:::

:::description
**Infernal Lineage**: Because I am born of a bloodline with infernal
lineage, I gain +2 when I am Cleverly Arcane and casting spells related
to fire, coersion, and diabolism.
:::

:::description
**Spell-like Abilities**: Because my lineage grants me innate magical
capabilities, I may use my Focused Archetype instead of the Arcane
Archetype to activate a small set of specific magical abilities and to
intuitively understand magical phenomenon related to my particular
lineage. GM\'s discretion applies.
:::

:::description
**Supernatural Durability**: Because I am descended from one or more
supernatural ancestors I am more durable than normal. I reduce by one
(1) all non-magical stress inflicted on me.
:::

## Magus Stunts

Stunts that assist in making characters that ply both blade and spell.

:::description
**Aura Of The Magi**: Because I have trained as a Magus and am adept at
using my magic to protect myself from nearly any sort of harm, once per
session I may reflexively use my magic to avoid taking stress from a
single non-social attack of my choice. I may choose to use this ability
after I have made a defense check.
:::

:::description
**Chilling Blade**: **Because I am able to generate a magical aura of
intense elemental cold around my weapon, when I attack with my weapon
and inflict a consequence I may also add a circumstantial Aspect with
two free invocations to my target called Chilled To The Bone**. This
Aspect can be overcome by appropriate magic as a Superb (+5) difficulty,
or by mundane means of warming the target up as a Great (+4) difficulty
(but this usually takes more than an exchange to set up). If the target
already has this Aspect applied to them I may add another invocation.
This Aspect can be invoked by anyone to hamper the actions of the
target. I cannot use this Stunt on targets that are immune to cold.
:::

:::description
**Shield Of The Sword-magi**: Because I have trained as a Sword Magi and
am adept at using my magic to protect myself in combat, if I gain a
boost when defending with either Combative or Arcane, I may upgrade the
boost to the spell Aspect **Shield Of The Sword-Magi**, with two (2)
invokes. I may invoke this Aspect when defending or to overcome harmful
situational Aspects.
:::

:::description
**Shocking Blade**: Because I am able to generate a magical paralyzing
shock around my weapon, when I would roll 4dF to attack with my weapon I
may instead roll 6dF and choose the four (4) best dice for my result.
This is an electric attack and I cannot use this Stunt against opponents
who are immune to electricity.
:::

:::description
**Spellstrike of the Sword-magi**: Because I have trained as a Sword
Magi and can fight using my magic and my blade in tandem, if I attack an
opponent in the same zone while being Quickly Combative and get a boost
I may immediately invoke the boost to attack a second target in the same
zone while being Quickly Arcane.
:::

:::description
**Sword-magi**: Because I have trained as a Sword Magi and can fight
using my magic and my blade in tandem, when I am being Combative I may
add my Arcane capability to attack with a sword.
:::

:::description
**Champion Sword-magi (-2)**: Because I have trained as a Sword Magi and
can fight using my magic and my blade in tandem, when I am being
Combative I may add my Arcane capability to attack and defend with a
sword.
:::

:::description
**Master Sword-magi (-3)**: Because I have trained as a Sword Magi and
can fight using my magic and my blade in tandem, when I am being
Combative I may add my Arcane capability to attack and defend with a
sword. Further, when I am Arcanely attacking or creating advantage
against one or more targets in my own zone I may add my Combative
capability if it is appropriate to the narrative.
:::

:::description
**Sword Of The Sword-magi**: Because I have trained as a Sword Magi and
am adept at using my magic in conjunction with my blade, if I gain a
boost when attacking while being Combative or Arcane, I may upgrade the
boost to the spell Aspect **Sword Of The Sword-Magi**, with two (2)
invokes. This allows me to imbue my sword with magical power.
:::

:::description
**Vampiric Blade**: Because I am able to generate a magical necromantic
aura around my weapon, when I attack with my weapon and inflict a
consequence I may clear one of my stress boxes or my Mild consequence.
This is a life-affecting attack and I cannot use this Stunt against
opponents who are not living such as constructs, undead, and some
outsiders (GM\'s discretion applies).
:::

## Mental Stunts

Stunts related to affecting the minds of others, telepathy, psychic
barriers, and so on.

:::description
**Mind Fugue**: Because I have the ability to afflict the minds of
others with mental confusion and temporary insanity, I gain +1 while
Focused to create advantage on a foe within my zone to place the
situational Aspect **Demented Confusion** upon them. The recipient may
be compelled by the GM or other players to do bizarre and illogical (but
not suicidal) things. The Aspect lasts for a scene but can be overcome
via appropriate magic as a Superb (+5) difficulty challenge. The
recipient themselves can also overcome the Aspect while Carefully
Focused as a Fantastic (+6) difficulty challenge. This is a
mind-affecting ability.

This stunt requires Focused +3 or better to use.
:::

:::description
**Psychic Blade**: Because I can create tangible weapons of pure psychic
energy with the strength of my mind, I may use Focused instead of
Combatives when I fight with my psychic weapons.

This stunt requires Focused +3 or better to use.
:::

:::description
**Psychic Sense**: Because I have preternatural and mildly precognitive
psychic senses, I gain +1 to notice things that could harm me when I am
Focused.
:::

:::description
**Psychic Shield**: Because I can protect myself with a psychic aura, I
reduce by one (1) all stress inflicted on me by non-social attacks if I
am aware of the attack.

This stunt requires Focused +3 or better to use.
:::

:::description
**Psychic Sprint**: Because I have mastered a psychometabolic
discipline, once per scene whenever I move a zone I may choose to
immediately move another zone for free and this does not prevent me from
attacking. Alternately, if I do nothing but move I may use this ability
to move four (4) zones instead of two (2). I also gain +2 while Quickly
Focused in any contest or challenge that involves running fast.

This stunt requires Focused +3 or better to use.
:::

:::description
**Seductive Domination**: Because I have the ability to take control of
the minds of others by seducing them, while I am Sneakily Focused I can
employ a vaneer of seduction or other predatory social wiles against a
living target in my zone that I am in close contact with. Each exchange
I continue my seduction I may make mental attacks against the target.
Consequences inflicted by this ability pertain to my gaining increasing
control over the target\'s mind. If the target concedes to me, the
target must do as I command in general but retains enough control to
avoid doing anything fundamentally against their nature (i.e. they may
resist one of my commands if they have a relevant Aspect). If the target
is taken out with this ability I assume full control of the target\'s
behavior until they are able to recover from the Consequences. This is a
mind-affecting ability.

This stunt requires Focused +3 or better to use.
:::

## Primordial Stunts

Stunts that allow Primal characters to expand or specialize their
abilities, to better interact with wilderness and nature, model concepts
found in the source material, or take advantage of ideas presented in
the [Simple Magic Guidelines](#simple-magic-guidelines) guidelines and
[Simple Magic Options](#simple-magic-options).

:::description
**Barkskin Knack**: Because I have a minor magical knack, I can create
advantage while Carefully Primal vs an Average (+1) difficulty to apply
the Aspect **Barkskin** to myself. While this Aspect is active I gain +2
when defending against physical or damaging magical attacks. This Aspect
may also be invoked to offer additional protection when defending from
physical or magical harm. This Aspect can be overcome and removed as a
Superb (+5) difficulty by those with Primal +3 or higher.

This stunt requires Primal +1 or better to use.
:::

:::description
**Entangling Undergrowth**: Because I am a master of natural magics,
when I am in a rural area with vegetation, while I am Carefully Primal I
may attempt to overcome a Great (+4) difficulty to cause the undergrowth
in my zone or an adjacent zone to animate and wrap itself around and
entangle all targets. See the Entangling Undergrowth profile for
details. I am immune to this effect.

:::description
###### Entangling Undergrowth

**Aspects** Animated Undergrowth, Creeping Vines

**Good At** Entangling (+5)

**Limitation**: An immobile construct anchored to its zone.

**Hits**:

-   \[1\]\[1\]\[1\]\[1\]\[1\]
:::
:::

:::description
**Forest Bandit**: Because I am so good at practicing banditry in the
forests, I am able to add my Roguish and Primal capabilities while
setting up or fighting in ambushes in wildland areas.
:::

:::description
**Hunting Archer**: Because I am a master archer and hunter, I may use
Primal instead of Combative to attack with any kind of bow and arrow.
:::

:::description
**Living Off The Land**: Because I am adept at surviving off of what
nature offers me, I am always able to find enough food and water to keep
myself and a couple of other people or animals healthy while in
wildlands and rural areas (i.e. above ground and not near a city or
town). Additionally if I\'ve had at least half a day to become familiar
with the terrain in a specific area of wilderness I gain +1 on all
actions while being Primal. How large the area of wilderness might be is
left to the GM\'s discretion, but it should be at least five square
miles.
:::

:::description
**Pass Without Trace**: Because of my mastery of the natural world, I
gain +1 when I am Sneakily Primal while in the wildlands, I am
unobstructed by undergrowth, and if I take a full move I may move three
zones instead of two. Finally, tracking me in wildland areas is very
difficult; those attempting it must overcome a difficulty equal to my
**((Sneaky + Primal) \* 2)**.
:::

:::description
**Prepared Caster (Primal)**: Because of my devotion to primordial
nature, each morning I may \'prepare\' a number of \'rites\' equal to
**((Careful + Sneaky) \* Primal)**.

To prepare a rite I roll 4dF against a Mediocre (+0) difficulty, adding
a preparation bonus equal to double my Primal bonus.

I temporarily gain a new personal Aspect corresponding to the rite I
prepared with **one invoke, and annotated with the margin of success**.

Later during the day I may \'cast\' a prepared rite by invoking its
Aspect as an action and resolving the rite using the previously rolled
margin of success.

It is possible for a rite resolution to fail if the margin of success is
insufficient to the difficulty or if I am opposed successfully. I can
spend a Fate point at this time to add +2 shifts to the margin of
success.

Unfortunately due to my focus on prepared casting, I cannot free cast
anything other than simple primal effects known as favors.

*Using Spell Write-ups*

If I am preparing a rite from a write-up that indicates an Approach be
combined with Primal to cast the rite, with language such as \'while
Sneakily Primal\', I ignore the requirement and use my prepared bonus
instead.

If I am preparing a rite from a write-up that states a particular
difficulty level, with language such as \'vs a Good (+3) difficulty)\',
the previously rolled margin of success is applied against the stated
difficulty when I \'cast\' it; any remaining shifts can be allocated per
the [Simple Magic Guidelines](#simple-magic-guidelines).
:::

:::description
**Primal Pugilist**: Because I am able to fight with my natural weapons
and with feral intensity, I may use Primal instead of Focused when
fighting barehanded or grappling.
:::

:::description
**Primal Reduction**: Because I am significantly more rugged, robust,
and survivable due to my deep connection with primal forces, I reduce by
one (1) all physical stress inflicted on me, and I reduce by two (2) all
environmental stress inflicted on me.
:::

:::description
**Primal Resistance**: Because my primal nature and elemental affinity
protects me, I may use Primal to defend against non-Primal magical
attacks without needing to first create an advantage to invoke.
:::

:::description
**Stalking Hunter**: Because I am so good at stalking, hunting, and
pouncing upon prey unnoticed, I get +2 when I am Sneakily Primal and
create advantage or overcome challenges to set up and execute ambushes
while in wildlands.
:::

:::description
**Swamp Fighter**: Because I am so adept at fighting within swampy areas
and using my environment effectively, I may add Primal as a bonus when I
am Combative in swamps and marshlands.
:::

:::description
**Swamp Stride**: Because of my mastery of the natural world, I gain +1
when I am Sneakily Primal while in swamps and marshlands, I am
unobstructed by undergrowth and areas of water, and if I take a full
move I may move three zones instead of two. Finally, tracking me in
swampy areas is very difficult; those attempting it must overcome a
difficulty equal to my **((Sneaky + Primal) \* 3)**.
:::

:::description
**Tracker**: Because I am so good at tracking a quary, I get +2 when I
am Carefully Primal and create advantage or overcome challenges related
to tracking things down in wilderness settings.
:::

:::description
**Urban Jungle**: Because I have mastered the art of fading away,
blending in, and avoiding notice even in urban areas among people, I can
use Primal instead of Roguish to create advantage and overcome when
attempting to avoid being noticed in civilized areas (Primal is already
usable for this in rural, wildland areas).
:::

:::description
**Valimancer / Theurge**: Because I have mastered the ancient magics of
the Primal Element of Positive Energy, the raw quintessence from which
all material things are formed, I may combine my Divine and Primal
Archetypes when I am casting spells related to radiance (pure energy),
healing, creation ex nihilo, directly opposing negative energy, and so
forth.
:::

:::description
**Voidmancer / Anatheurge**: Because I have mastered the ancient magics
of the Primal Element of Negative Energy, the void which eventually
claims all things, the null state that counterpoints existence, I may
combine my Divine and Primal Archetypes when I am casting spells related
to stagnation, entropy, undeath, enervation, life draining, directly
opposing positive energy, and so forth.
:::

:::description
**Wilderness Runner**: Because I am so swift and able to run for hours,
I may add my Primal capability bonus when I am Focused while running in
wildlands.
:::

:::description
**Wilderness Warrior**: Because I am so adept at stalking prey and
hunting in the wilderness, I may use Primal instead of Combative to
attack when I am in the wilderness.
:::

## Smaller Stunts

Stunts related to being smaller than normal sized.

:::description
**Elusive Target**: Because I am so tiny and elusive. I may always use
Focused to defend against physical and magical attacks, if I am aware of
my attacker. This doesn\'t work against similar sized opponents or
attacks that affect an entire zone.
:::

:::description
**Small And Sneaky**: Because I am small and able to avoid notice, I may
use Focused instead of Roguish or Primal when Sneakily attempting to
avoid notice. However, I suffer a -1 penalty when I do so.
:::

:::description
**Small And Sneaky (-2)**: Because I am small and able to avoid notice,
I may use Focused instead of Roguish or Primal when Sneakily attempting
to avoid notice.
:::

:::description
**Small But Fast**: Because I am fleet on my feet, when I do nothing but
move in an exchange I may move up to two (2) extra zones.
:::

:::description
**Small Target**: Because I am a small target and difficult to hit, I
gain +1 to defend against targeted attacks.
:::

## Social Stunts

Stunts related to interacting with or manipulating other people.

:::description
**Can\'t We Find A Way To \'Work This Out\'Non-violently?**: Because I
am able to appeal to the baser instincts of most people and appear
extremely \'likeable\', I\'m good at avoiding unwanted conflict and
changing the nature of interaction from physical conflict to a mental
and social contest. I gain +2 whenever I attempt to avoid or end a
conflict via non-violence.
:::

:::description
**Charming And Coy**: Because I am adept at manipulating social
situations to my benefit, I gain +1 when I am Roguish and engage in a
social challenge, contest, or conflict.
:::

:::description
**Combative Intimidation**: Because I am heavily armed and obviously
skilled at inflicting harm, I may add my Combative capability to create
advantage or overcome when I attempt to intimidate or assert control
over a social situation if I am armed appropriately.
:::

:::description
**Deceitful**: Because I am so deceitful, I get +2 when I am Cleverly
Roguish and create advantage or overcome challenges where my smooth
patter applies.
:::

:::description
**Friendly Diplomacy**: Because I am charmingly friendly to almost
everyone and am good at making friends and calming situations down, I
gain +2 whenever I attempt to avoid or end a conflict via non-violence,
keep the peace, or improve the \'mood of the room\'.
:::

:::description
**Sense Deceit**: Because I am so skilled at sensing people\'s true
motives, I gain +2 when I am Cleverly Roguish and attempt to discern if
I am being deceived or tricked.
:::

:::description
**Verbal Skirmisher**: Because I am adept at applying my understanding
of tactics and strategy to the \'social battlefield\', I may use
Combative instead of Roguish for social interactions such as debating,
arguing, insulting, taunting, and assertively taking control of a social
scene. I gain +1 while Combative to create advantage or overcome
challenges when using this Stunt. However people tend to take offense;
things sometimes escalate, and enemies are sometimes made.

When using this Stunt I can be compelled by the GM to fail.
:::

:::description
**Wheeler Dealer**: Because I excel at talking my way into and out of
situations and making deals, I gain +2 while Cleverly Roguish in social
situations.
:::

## Special Stunts

Stunts that are unusual, push the envelope, or otherwise resist easy
categorization.

:::description
**Better Lucky Than Good**: \[Because I am unusually lucky, whenever I
make a 4dF resolution roll and the result is 0 0 0 0 (all blanks) I
treat the outcome as if I had rolled + + + + (all pluses).
:::

:::description
**Charmed Existence**: Because I lead a charmed existence, whenever I
roll - - \-- (all minuses) on 4dF I treat it as if I rolled 0 0 0 0 (all
blanks).
:::

:::description
**Cloud Step**: Because I have mastered a mystic discipline, I may defy
the normal bonds of the earth to float upon the wind and available
contact points as if I weighed no more than a feather. I am never harmed
or unduly inconvenienced by falling, even if I am unconscious. However
this effect is temporarily cancelled if I am encumbered or anchored by
more than half my own body weight.
:::

:::description
**Companion\'s Senses**: Because I share a mystical bond with my animal
companion, I may spend a Fate point to share their senses for a scene at
a range of a few dozen miles. This allows me to witness events through
the senses of my companion as if I were present. This can be detected by
others with appropriate senses as a Quick + Primal overcome action vs a
Fantastic (+6) difficulty.
:::

:::description
**Control Aquatic Creatures**: Because I can control aquatic creatures,
I can justify using Primal to have social encounters with aquatic
creatures as if I share a language with them, and under most
circumstances they are generally friendly to me. I also gain +1 to
create advantages related to gaining aid or cooperation from aquatic
creatures.
:::

:::description
**Detect Evil**: Because I am sensitive to ethical and moral
propensities, I am able to sense strong concentrations of immorality and
evilness in individuals, objects, and areas from six (6) zones away even
if the source in not detectable to my other senses. Additionally, I gain
+2 to notice relevant concentrations of evil while Focused.
:::

:::description
**Detect Good**: Because I am sensitive to ethical and moral
propensities, I am able to sense strong concentrations of virtue and
goodness in individuals, objects, and areas from six (6) zones away even
if the source in not detectable to my other senses. Additionally, I gain
+2 to notice relevant concentrations of goodness while Focused.
:::

:::description
**Fated Fortune**: Because I thrive under pressure, when I spend a fate
point to invoke one of my Aspects I gain a +3 bonus instead of a +2
bonus.
:::

:::description
**Favored By Fortune**: Because I am unusually lucky, I add +1 shift to
my total whenever I make a 4dF resolution roll and there are no minuses
(-) in the result.
:::

:::description
**Firebreath (-3)**: Because I am able to expel a cone of burning flame
from my mouth, I gain +2 to make a special flaming breath attack
affecting all targets in my zone without having to split my shifts
between them. This attack is non-discriminatory, and often causes
collateral damage.
:::

:::description
**Globe Of Invulnerability**: Because I have mastered a potent magical
discipline, when I am Carefully Arcane I can **spend a Fate point** to
allow create an advantage to add the situational Aspect **Globe Of
Invulnerability** with two (2) invokes to myself for the remainder of
the scene (and perhaps longer). I can add more invokes to this Aspect by
being Carefully Arcane and creating an advantage against a difficulty of
Great (+4). While this Aspect is available I can invoke it to use
Carefully Arcane to defend against any kind of attack affecting me or
the area immediately around me (including any allies). This Aspect can
be overcome and removed by a character with Arcane, Divine, or Primal of
+4 or higher opposed by a Legendary (+8) difficulty.

This stunt requires Arcane +4 or better to use.
:::

:::description
**Globe Of Invulnerability (-2)**: Because I have mastered a potent
magical discipline, when I am Carefully Arcane I can **spend a Fate
point** to allow create an advantage to add the situational Aspect
**Globe Of Invulnerability** with three (3) free invokes to myself for
the remainder of the scene (and perhaps longer). I can add more invokes
to this Aspect by being Carefully Arcane and creating an advantage
against a difficulty of Great (+4). While this Aspect is available I can
invoke it to use Carefully Arcane to defend against any kind of attack
affecting me or the area immediately around me (including any allies).
This Aspect can be overcome and removed by a character with Arcane,
Divine, or Primal of +6 or higher opposed by a Wondrous (+10)
difficulty.

This stunt requires Arcane +6 or better to use.
:::

:::description
**Heed Me!**: Because I have a magical knack that allows me to augment
my spoken voice with enchanting magics I may use Arcane for social
interactions if I can talk and my target can hear me. I am resisted by
Arcane when I do so. This is a form of mind-affecting magic.

This stunt requires Arcane +1 or better to use.
:::

:::description
**Reflect Magic**: Because I am able to reflect magic to protect myself,
once per scene if I am the target of a spell and I am aware of it I may
overcome the same difficulty required to cast the spell while Quickly
Focused; however I suffer a -2 penalty to my roll. If I am successful
the spell has no effect on me and I turn the spell back upon its caster,
against whom the spell has its full normal effect.
:::

:::description
**Reflect Magic (-2)**: Because I am able to reflect magic to protect
myself, once per exchange if I am the target of a spell and I am aware
of it I may overcome the same difficulty required to cast the spell
while Quickly Focused; however I suffer a -2 penalty to my roll. If I am
successful the spell has no effect on me and I turn the spell back upon
its caster, against whom the spell has its full normal effect.
:::

:::description
**Retribution**: Because my retribution is terrible when I succesfully
attack an opponent who has inflicted stress or consequences upon me in
the current conflict I inflict +1 shift more damage and this damage
cannot be reduced.
:::

:::description
**Reverberation**: Because I know many Words of Power, if I am currently
able to speak as a non-action I may spend a Fate point to utter a Word
and immediately remove from play any one situational Aspect in my zone
or an adjacent zone with a difficulty of Legendary (+8) or less to
overcome. Though there is no 4dF roll involved, I am considered to be
acting in a Flashily Arcane manner when I do this and the reverberations
of the Word are very noticeable.
:::

:::description
**Secret Signs**: Because I have an unusual mystical talent I sometimes
see signs, portents, and sigils that provide me with information about
the present or near future that I could not possibly know otherwise. I
gain +2 while I am Focused and create advantage when I attempt to
discover or notice some detail, fact, Aspect, or truth about the scene,
or a person or group in it, even if it would not normally be possible
for me to know or detect this information with merely mundane senses.
:::

:::description
**Slip Away (-2)**: Because I am excellent at getting away with it and
slipping away unseen, if there is a momentary distraction or opportunity
I may spend a Fate point to immediately exit the scene by means
appropriate to the narrative such as slippling away into a crowd, or
through a hidden door to a secret escape hatch I happened to know about,
or by using a magic item I happened to have, etc. I cannot be pursued in
the current scene.
:::

:::description
**Sudden Slumber**: Because I have mastered a magical talent from olden
times, once per session I can put any number of nameless mooks who lack
consequence slots in my zone or an adjacent zone to sleep. I may affect
additional contiguous zones by spending a Fate point per additional
zone. To do this I must use Carefully Arcane to create the advantage
**Sleep Now My Pretties** against an Average (+1) difficulty. Those
affected will sleep artificially deeply, and resist being woken for the
remainder of the scene; someone trying to wake a victim must overcome a
difficulty equal to Average (+1) plus my margin of success.
:::

:::description
**Superior Senses (-2)**: Because I perceive the world via superior
senses I can see perfectly in total darkness, even if I am \'blinded\'.
Additionally, I can sense invisibile things that are near me; I gain +2
while Focused to overcome any Aspect related to invisibility or a
similar effect within my zone.
:::

:::description
**Universal Linguist**: Because I have a special ability with languages,
I can fluently speak and understand any spoken language I encounter.
:::

:::description
**Wild Shape (-2):**

Because I have the ability to change into the form of any normal animal
of my choice, I may spend a Fate point to temporarily assume an animal
form. My trappings magically change with me and are unavailable until I
return to my normal form.

When I change forms I move all of my Approach bonuses to a disposition
relevant to the animal form I am assuming, and I move all of my
Archetype bonuses to Focused (leaving all of my other Archetypes at +0).
This lasts for an entire scene unless I choose to return to normal,
which ends the effect. Additionally, I may spend another Fate point to
assume a different animal\'s form, and I do not have to first change
back to normal.

When I change forms I gain an additional Aspect named for the animal
form I have assumed which I can invoke when my current animal form is
relevant, and which can be compelled whenever my animal form or lack of
humanoid anatomy might inconvenience me.

If the animal form I change into has natural weapons I may use Focused
in place of Combatives while in a physical conflict.

If the animal form I change into has an unusual form of movement, such
as the flight of a bird, the running of a wolf, or the swimming of a
shark then I gain that mode of movement while I am in that form as well,
at the GM\'s discretion.

If the animal form I change into has an unusual or extra keen sense,
such as the low light vision of a cat, the olfactory senses of a canine,
or the echolocation of a bat then I gain that sense while I am in that
form as well, at the GM\'s discretion.
:::

This stunt requires Primal +1 or better to use.
:::

:::description
**Willful Invisibility**: Because I can turn invisibile at will, if I do
not attack or create advantage in an exchange I may place the
situational Aspect **\'Invisible\'** on myself as a free action that
takes no time before or after my normal action. If I attack or create
advantage while invisible, this Aspect is immediately removed and I
become visibile for at least one (1) exchange before I am able to use
this ability to become invisible again. My innate invisibility can be
temporarily neutralized by those with unusual senses or magic or special
items creating an applicable advantage; the difficulty to do so is
Superb (+5). It can also be overcome and thus removed by some abilities
that explicitly counter invisibility or dispel magic; the difficulty to
do so is Fantastic (+6).
:::

:::description
**Will To Power**: Because my will to push forward to victory is
absolute, once per session I may gain +4 when attempting to overcome any
one (1) situational Aspect in my zone or an adjacent zone.
:::

## Undead Stunts

Stunts related to being and Undead creature.

:::description
**Healed By Draining Life Energies (-3)**: Because I am strengthened by
draining the life forces of others, whenever I successfully use Life
Energy Drain to give a target a Consequence I may clear one of my own
stress boxes or a Consequence with a numerical value equal to or less
than the numerical value of the Consequnce I inflicted.
:::

:::description
**Life Energy Drain**: Because I am able to drain the life energy from
those I touch, if I inflict a Consequence on a target by hitting or
touching them I afflict them with enervation and ennui. Consequences
such as **Easily Fatigued**, **Fits Of Ennui**, **Prone To Depression**,
and **Sunk Into A Deep Funk** cause those afflicted to struggle to
motivate and empower themselves, to unexpectedly lose interest in being
active, become unconcerned about succeeding in their endeavors, and so
forth.
:::

:::description
**Undead Resistances (-4)**: Because I am Undead I am immune to death
effects, disease, mental effects, paralysis, poison, sleep, stun, and
energy drain. I also don\'t need to breathe and never get tired.
However, postive energy inflicts 2 extra shifts of stress against me,
and also I take stress from healing magics.
:::

## Warrior Stunts

Stunts related to martial feats, combatives, and being a superior
combatant.

:::description
**Acrobatic Fighting**: Because I am excellent at acrobatically flipping
around and tumbling to good advantage while in combat, when I am engaged
in a conflict I may add my Focused bonus to Combatives when I am able to
make my acrobatics relevant.
:::

:::description
**Aggressive Assault**: Because I am driven to extreme aggression, when
I am Forcefully Combative and attack I may add from one to four
additional Fate dice to my 4dF attack roll and choose the four best dice
as my result. However, until my next exchange whenever I defend I add
the same number of Fate dice to my defend rolls and choose the four
worst dice as my result.
:::

:::description
**Barbarian Beatdown**: Because I\'m able to use my athleticism and
physical advantages to good effect in a fight, I may use Focused instead
of Combative when fighting with an appropriate weapon.
:::

:::description
**Barehanded Fighting**: Because my fighting skills include barehanded
combat, I may use Combative instead of Focused when fighting barehanded
or grappling.
:::

:::description
**Bums Rush**: Because I like to overwhelm others, I get +2 when I am
Forceful and attempt to tackle or bowl over an opponent.
:::

:::description
**Canny Guard**: Because of my skill and experience as a warrior it is
difficult to catch me off guard. When I am defending against physical
attacks and tie, my opponent does not get a boost.
:::

:::description
**Charger**: Because I excel at charging into combat to deliver a
devastating attack, I gain +3 while Forcefully or Quickly Combative to
make melee attacks in a conflict if I first move one or more zones in
the same action to reach my opponent. I cannot split my shifts between
multiple opponents when I do this.
:::

:::description
**Combative Aegis**: Because I have developed my defensive form to a
high degree of skill, when I am Carefully Combative and appropriately
equipped, if someone else in my zone is physically attacked I may defend
on their behalf. However I take any shifts of damage that get past my
defenses, rather than the intended target.
:::

:::description
**Combat Veteran**: Because I have engaged in so much combat, I gain +1
when I am Combative and attack.
:::

:::description
**Combat Veteran (-2)**: Because I have engaged in so much combat, I
gain +1 when I am Combative and attack or defend.
:::

:::description
**Courser**: Because I am so skilled at fighting while mounted, I gain
+2 when I am Quickly Combative and attack from the back of a mount.
:::

:::description
**Defensive Posture**: Because I am trained in a defensive fighting
style, if I get a boost when I am Carefully Combative while attacking I
may use it to create the situational Aspect **Defensive Posture** on
myself with two (2) invokes.
:::

:::description
**En Garde**: Because I am extra good at using a weapon defensively to
parry and deflect attacks, I gain +2 while being Combative to defend
against melee attacks that I am aware of while appropriately armed.
:::

:::description
**Forcefully Aggressive**: Because I am so physically powerful, I get +1
when I am Forceful and attack.
:::

:::description
**Heavy Armor Training**: Because I have trained to wear heavy armor
extensively, I gain +1 to Combatives to defend when I am heavily
armored.
:::

:::description
**Improved Disarm**: Because I like to disarm others, I get +1 when I am
Quick and attempt to create advantage to attach the situational Aspect
**Disarmed** to other people who weild weapons.
:::

:::description
**Indomitable**: Because I refuse to give in and I always vigorously
protect myself, I get +1 when I am Forceful and defend if I am aware
that I am in danger.
:::

:::description
**Light Armor Training**: Because I have trained to wear light armor
extensively, I gain +1 to Combatives to defend when I am lightly
armored.
:::

:::description
**Lightning Draw**: Because I have mastered the art of the lightning
draw, I gain an automatic boost when I am Quick and draw my blade for
the first time in an exchange. Additionally, if I opt to do this at the
beginning of a conflict I gain +2 to determine who goes first.
:::

:::description
**Medium Armor Training**: Because I have trained to wear medium armor
extensively, I gain +1 to Combatives to defend when I am appropriately
armored.
:::

:::description
**Mounted Strike**: Because I excel at ride-by attacks when mounted,
whenever I am Quickly Combative and attack after moving a zone, if I
succeed with style my mount and I may immediately move 1 zone away as a
free action. If I also choose to reduce the damage I inflict to get a
boost I may use that boost to move an additional zone further away. I
may also choose to spend a Fate point to move an additional zone further
away.
:::

:::description
**Passing Strike**: Because I have a fast-moving agile fighting style,
whenever I am Quickly Combative and attack, if I choose to reduce the
damage I inflict to get a boost I may use that boost to immediately move
one (1) zone away, as a free action. If I also spend a Fate point I may
move an additional zone further away.
:::

:::description
**Pounce!**: Because I excel at leaping into combat in a startling burst
of aggression, I gain +4 on my first attack in a conflict if I act first
and can charge, lunge at, or pounce upon an opponent.
:::

:::description
**Powerful Attack**: Because I am so skilled at delivering forceful
attacks, I gain +2 when I am Forcefully Combative and attack while armed
with a weapon.
:::

:::description
**Quick Strike**: Because I am fast and accurate, I get +3 when I am
Quickly Combative and attack an opponent that has not yet gone in this
exchange.
:::

:::description
**Two Weapon Fighting (-2)**: Because I am so skilled at dual-wielding
two weapons, I gain +1 when I am Combative and attack or defend while
armed appropriately. Additionally if I make a physical attack while
armed appropriately and split shifts between exactly two opponents, I
inflict +1 shift of additional damage to each target.
:::

:::description
**Warrior\'s Mettle**: Because I have trained extensively and am made of
sterner stuff than most people, I may use Combatives to defend against
ranged attacks and targeted magic by deflecting such attacks with a
precise flick or parry of my weapon, or with my armor or a shield, or by
some other means justified by the narrative.

This Stunt requires Combative +2 to use.

NOTE: Combative +3 and higher already allows a character to do this.
This Stunt is for characters who have Combative +2 and are willing to
allocate a Stunt to gain this ability.
:::

:::description
**Weapon Mastery (-3)**: Because I have spent many years mastering a
type of weapon, I gain +1 to Combatives when I attack, defend, create
advantage, or overcome while using any weapon of that type.
:::

:::description
**Whirlwind Attack**: Because I am a potent warrior once per session
when I am Flashily Combative and attack with a suitable weapon, I may
affect all enemy targets in my zone without having to split my shifts
between them.
:::

:::description
**Whirlwind Attack (-2)**: Because I am a potent warrior once per
scene when I am Flashily Combative and attack with a suitable
weapon, I may affect all enemy targets in my zone without having to
split my shifts between them.
:::

:::description
**Whirlwind Attack (-3)**: Because I am a potent warrior, when I am
Flashily Combative and attack with a suitable weapon I may affect all
enemy targets in my zone without having to split my shifts between them.
However if I use this ability more than once per conflict I take a
cumulative -1 penalty to my 4dF attack roll for each time I\'ve
previously used the ability in the current conflict.
:::

# Online Content

## Sample Adventures

Various
[adventures](http://www.killershrike.com/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Adventures/Adventures.aspx)
are available online for reference and reuse, including the following:

### Shattered Star

Write-ups from [Shards of
Sin](http://www.killershrike.com/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Adventures/DawnOfTheShatteredStar/Chapters/Chapter2/Part1.aspx?section=DawnOfTheShatteredStar),
the first book of the **Shattered Star** Adventure Path (broken into
four parts).

Write-ups from [Curse of the Lady\'s
Light](http://www.killershrike.com/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Adventures/DawnOfTheShatteredStar/Chapters/Chapter3/GMResources.aspx?section=DawnOfTheShatteredStar),
the second book of the **Shattered Star** Adventure Path (broken into
three parts).

### Dawn of the Scarlet Sun

Write-ups from the [Dawn of the Scarlet
Sun](http://www.killershrike.com/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Adventures/DawnOfTheShatteredStar/Chapters/Chapter1/GMResources.aspx?section=DawnOfTheShatteredStar)
Adventure Module.

### Rise of the Runelords

Write-ups from **Burnt Offerings**, the first book of the [Rise of the
Runelords](http://www.killershrike.com/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Adventures/RiseOfTheRunelords/Chapters/Chapter1/CastOfCharacters.aspx?section=RiseOfTheRunelords)
Adventure Path.

## Sample Characters

Various
[Iconic](http://www.killershrike.com/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Characters/Iconics.aspx)
characters demonstrating a wide range of archetypes and also usable as
pregenerated starting characters are provided online.


## Sample Mutagen Elemental Forms

The [Mutagen Elmental Form Stunt
Reference](http://www.killershrike.com/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Content/Characters/Elementals/ElementalForm.aspx)
is available online provided as a convenience for characters using the
**Mutagen (Elementalform)** stunt.

# Acknowledgments, Notes, and Licensing

This work is based on Pathfinder Fate Accelerated, authored by Ed
"Killer Shrike" Hastings and found at
http://www.killershrike.com/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Menu.aspx. 

This work is licensed under a [Creative Commons Attribution-
NonCommercial 4.0 International
License](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/).

[Fate Accelerated](http://www.evilhat.com/home/fae/) is a product of
[Evil Hat Productions.

[Pathfinder](http://paizo.com/pathfinder) is a product of Paizo Games.

This document contains content pulled from the [Pathfinder Fate
Accelerated
website](http://www.killershrike.com/Fate/Fae/Pathfinder/Menu.aspx) in
early March 2018. Changes made to the content on that website since then
are not reflected in this document.
